F817 E1103_1 R208357 99867314 119621
J. F. Didascaliae DISCOURSES On Severall places of The Holy Scriptures Publikely delivered on sundrie occasions, unto an English congre∣gation of believers in Amsterdam. The first part. The contents whereof, follow after the preface to the reader. Imprinted in the yeare 1643.
1 Pet. 4: 10. AS every man hath receaved the gift, so minister the same one to an other, as good stewards of the manyfold grace of God. 1 Cor. 14. 1. FOllow after charity, desire spirituall gifts, but rather that ye may prophesie. 3. He that prophesieth speaketh unto men, to edification, exhortation and comfort. 29. Let the prophets speak two or three, and let the others judge. Rom. 12: 6. HAving then gifts differing according to the grace that is given unto us, whither prophesie, let us prophesie according to the pro∣portion of faith.
To the Reader in generall. COurteous reader whosoever thou art; whiles I have of late dayes seen, and heard of, divers worthie men, publishing to the view of the world, their endeavors, in allaying controversies in matters of reli∣gion, & state policie; it hath come into my thoughts, to doe some∣thing in the mean season, accor∣ding to my weake abilitie, for the edification of the Church; least whiles we hearken after contro∣versie among others, we should forget, or be unmyndfull of our
owne growth in grace, and sancti∣fication. If therfore thou receave any profit by this seed, which was prepared for, and sowen in a con∣gregation of God's people, give the praise to God who Psal. 145: 16. openeth his hand and filleth with his blessing every living thing, and causeth the sun to shine upon the just and unjust, & the raine to Math. 5: 45. raine upon the evill and the good, who by sending his word to all peoples leaveth them without excuse who obey not the gospell of our Lord Jesus Christ. If thou find any weaknesse or im∣perfections in the composing, stile, method, or matter (which cannot but be expected, it being the first of my labours that hath seen the sun) impute that alto∣gither to me and my ignoraunce, who am of all men most unfit to serve in Gods church, yea I maie saie (as the truth is) but a plant in
his orchard; and withall remem∣ber what the Apostle saith 2 Cor. 2: 16. who is suffitient for these things? Further∣more if thou espyest (here and there) reproofes of sin in the people of God, doe not therfore rejoyce over them in their tres∣passing, but if thou 1 Cor. 10: 12. standest take heed lest thou fall; and put on bow∣els of compassion, and pitty them whom the Lord hath humbled: and if thou be a Christian pray for them, and in praying for them for∣get not thy self, that thou mayst be delivered from temptation, remembring also the judgment denounced against Obadiah vers 12. 13. Edom be∣cause he rejoyced in the day of the calamity of his brother Israel. Thus praying the Lord daylie to increase the work of his grace, in the abolishing of the kingdome of Satan, and increasing the sin∣cere profession of the glorious
gospell of his deare sonne, I bid thee heartilie farewell. In Am∣sterdam this 23th of the 10th moneth called October, in the yeare 1641. I. F.
To the faithfull brethren of the English church in Amstel∣redam wherof I am an unwor∣thy member, all increase of grace here, and satietie of joy hereafter. DEare brethren; the knowledge of myne owne ignoraunce and inability, hath enforced me hitherto to forbear to thrust my self forth to the view of men, in any thing, either by word, or writing; fearing lest the truth which I professe should receive anie wound, through my error, or insuffitiencie; from such as wait for occasion to carpe, or find fault, espetially at men infe∣riour to themselves, as it is the manner of cowards and dastardlie companions, to dominere over striplings, but with men of equall strength with themselves they dare not encounter; for the which cause I still tremble to doe it: yet con∣sidering
that Mat. 5: 15. no man lighteth a candle & putteth it under a bushell but on a candlesticke, and God Al∣mighty giveth not his gifts to Math. 25: 25. 27. be hid in a napkin, but to be imployed for his use, in edifying his church and profitting others, and small gifts are to be 2 Sam. 1: 6 stir∣red up and increased: also wee find that the prophets of God did not only pronounce their prophesies unto the people, but many of them were also committed to writing, that they might be remembred, and often repeated; and the Apostles not only preached, but wrote epistles to the churches, to the end that others also might receive benefit by them, as wee see by our owne comfort∣able experience at this day, who have the same prophesies, and epistles, both for our planting, watering, and in∣creasing in grace; and it is a thing, both practised, and approved, in this age wherein we live, and hath bin time out of mynd, not onlie to preach, but
also to publish in writing, such things as men think any wise benefitiall. I have therfore, with disire of Gods glo∣rie, and the good of all those that shall accept of my paines, but principally of you my loving brethren (to whom it is most of all due) recollected my medi∣tations upon some places of the holy scripture which heretofore I have hand∣led by God's helpe, and whereof you have bin hearers, in our publike exer∣cises in the church; Not in the least judging them, in respect of any excel∣lent expressions or methood, worthy of acceptaunce, (they being performed in all plainnesse) but cheiflie desireing thereby to put you in mynd of some thinges, which formerlie ye have heard, because I see both in my selfe, and others, too great a neglect of the things we heare, and manie times doctrine which should be earnestly minded by us, is no sooner delivered, but forgotten, according to the proverb, in at one
eare, and out at another. To the end therefore, that ye maie examine your selves, whither you have bin carefull hearers of the word, and Iam. 1: 22. not only hearers but doers of the same, I doe present you with this remembraunce, as the first token of my love in this sort, which God hath hitherto inabled me to performe; desireing that the same may be acceptable to the saints. In which, though you shall find sometimes more and sometimes lesse than hath bin deli∣vered, yet take it (I pray) in good part, considering that men not relying punctually upon their meditations, may deliver more and other things than they before thought upon, and being prone to forgetfulnes, may omit some things which they had intended, or els time may not serve them to deliver all; but the spirits of the prophets are subject to the prophets. And if in this I shall find that I have don God anie service, I shall not cease my further endeauors
as God shall give occasion, either in this, or any other kind. Nowe I be∣seech Almightie God who is Heb. 12: 2. the author and finisher of our faith, to stablish, confirme, and strengthen you in his truth, and make you to increase and grow in grace, and in the lively know∣ledge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, to whom be glory both now and for ever more Amen. So prayeth your loving brother in the faith, and the Lord's unworthy servaunt. I. F.
A table of the principall points handled in this booke Disc: 1. MOses's prayer for God's presence Exod. 33: 15. explayned, Pag. 1. Doct. 1. That God's presence in weightie matters is above all thinges to be sought for handled, pag. 9. Doct. 2. Miserie accompanieth those that are without God's presence, pag. 36. Doct. 3. A meane and lowe estate with supply of our absolute necessities; is better than great dignitie, without the blessing of God, pag. 40. Disc: 2. IAcob's answer to Judah's plea for the taking of Benjamin into Aegipt. on Genes. cap. 43. expounded, pag. 43. Quest. Wherfore Iudah the fourth son is chiefe speaker? answered, pag. 47. Quaest. Whither Iudah doth not trans∣gresse, in refusing to goe at his father's command without Benjamine? answered, pag. 49. Quaest. Why Iacob would not commit Benjamine to Reuben upon a greater cau∣tion, than he doth to Iudah? answered, pag. 52. Doct. 1. In matters controvertable; we are not to respect the persons of them that speake; but the substance and matter of their speech, pag. 56. Doct. 2. Men ought not to be so reso∣lute
in the performance of unadvised pur∣poses: but they ought to be disswaded therefrom upon good grounds and argu∣ments, pag. 68. Doct. 3. Men ought never to have such a self conceit of their owne Iudgments in matters controvertable; but that they are to be willing to have them tryed by the arguments of others grounded upon the word of God, yea and being convinced to renounce the same, pag. 72. Iacob's present to Ioseph, wherein is discoursed the lawfulnes and right use of gifts and presents, pag. 82. Iacob's sending double monies, where∣in he manifested his feare of his sons, his righteousnes, contentation, & prudencie, pag. 85. Iacob's prayer for the good successe of his sons, pag. 87. Doct. 4. No advice prosperous, without God's blessing; which is to be blessing; which is to be obtayned by earnest prayer, pag. 88. Doct. 5. God must be rested in as able to helpe us in that which we desire, pag. 89. Doct. 6. There is no favour to be had from earthly princes &c but God is the ef∣fitient author of it, pag. 90. Iacob's godly resolution to rest in the will of God if Simeon and Benjamin had bin kept from him, pag. 95. How parents ought to tender their chil∣drē, & chlildrē honour their parents. p. 97. How parents should behave them∣selves
in the visitation, and death of thei children, pag. 98. Doct. 7. God's people must rest with pa∣tience in God's good pleasure, in disposing the yssue of their affaires, pag. 99. Disc: 3. A Treatise of Christ's kingdome, o Luc. 1. vers 33. pag. 104. Conclusion. 1. That Iesus Christ, born o the virgin Mary is a King, pag. 110. 2 Concl. The house of Iacob is the king∣dome of Christ; and who they be, pag. 121. 3 Concl. That the Kingdome of Chris is Eternall, pag. 136. Disc: 4. THe afflicted comforted. on Gen. 45. vers 5. 6. 7. 8. pag. 147. Spetiall things observable in the chapte in generall, pag. 149. Vertues observable in Ioseph, worthy o imitation, pag. 151. Doct. 1. Christian bretheren should comfort one another, in the time of sor∣row, pag. 159. Doct. 2. God's children may not avenge themselves, but rather doe good for evill. pag. 166. Doct. 3. When men are in some good measure humbled by sorrow for sin; their sorrow ought by others to be mitigated, pag. 176. Object. How Ioseph could say that God
sent him to Egipt to preserve life, seing his brethren sold him out of malice? an∣swered, pag. 182. Object. Whither Ioseph in saying that God sent him thither &c, doth not make God the author of the sin of his brethren? answered, pag. 185. Object. Whither that speech of Ioseph doth not absolue his bretheren of sin in that action? answered, pag. 187. Doct. 4. God's providence in all estates of men ought by them to be espetially mynded and acknowledged, pag. 188. Discours 5. IUdah's blessing fore-told by Iacob his father, on his death bed, on Gen. cap. 49. vers 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. pag. 198. Doct. 1. That the gifts of God are of his free grace and mercy, and not of nature, or mans merit or desert in any respect. ag. 204. Doct. 2. True repentance for sin com∣itted, bringeth men to the assurance of God's favour, so absolutly as if they had ot sinned, pag. 210. Doct. 3. Those men are most of all to be onoured and praised, upon whom God estoweth most of his gifts and graces. ag. 212. The scepter of Iudah, opened and ap∣lyed, pag. 213. What is meant by Shiloh's coming, & the gathering, of the peoples to him, pag. 219.
Some cavils of the Iewes answered, pag. 221. Conclusion. That the child Iesus, con∣ceaved of the holy Ghost, born of the vir∣gin Mary, in the dayes of Herod the king &c is that true Shiloh &c and that he is already come in the flesh, &c. pag. 223. The reader may be pleased to take notice of these caveats, by reason of escapes in the printing. Page. 17▪ line. 8. read, only say. p. 18. l. 28. r hath, p. 22▪ l. 15. r and, p. 26. l. 17. r up, l. 18. r consciences, p. 35▪ l. 13. r he, p. 36. l. 2. r their, p. 39. l. 6. r are, l. 27▪ vvithout, p. 48. l. 17. r becaus, p. 49. l. 28. r handle p. 51. margent▪ r Iacob, p. 55. l. 12. r vvith, p. 57. l. 1 r vveighed, p. 68. l. 26. r first, p. 75. l. 25. r conceit▪ p. 89. l. 10. r povverfull, p. 92. l. 13. r of the people, p. 100▪ l. 1. r Lord's, p. 102. l. 4. r heed, p. 108. l. 27. r Mary t virgin, p. 111. l. 2. r king, p. 116. l. 21 and 22. r creatur p. 129. l. 4 r joyne, p. 132. l. 15. r this his, p. 146. l. 10. good fight of, p. 148. l. 5. r conscience, p. 151. l. 12. p▪ out (p. 158. l. 6. r vers 8. p. 171. l. 27. r fall, p. 180. marg r Math. 18. p. 188. l. 12. r fulfill, p. 189. l. 26. r vvhereo p. 194. l. 26. r &c; they, p. 196. l. 5. r that, p. 207. l. 6. presence, p. 209. l. 18. r have receaved.
MOSES'S PRAYER For Gods presence. Explained & made use of, on the 25th of the moneth August 1641 in way of preparation to the choice of elders in the Church. Exodus Cap. 33. vers 15. If thy presence goe not with us, carie us not up hence. THese wordes containe in them the reply of accep∣tation, made by Moses the servant of Jehovah, to the gratious answere which God had given to his prayer, whereof mention is made in the fore goeing verses. For our better understanding whereof, it shal not be amisse, briefly to consider the scope of this scripture, by that which goeth be∣fore. We may read in the former chapter,Exod. 32: 1. that Moses staying long in the Mount
with God, and delaying (as the people thought) to come downe from thence; theExod. 32: 1. children of Israel corrupted their wayes, and gathered them selves togither to Aaron, and said, up make us Gods to goe before us; for as for this Moses the man which brought us out of the land of Aegipt, we wote not what is become of him. Whereupon Aaron made them aExod. 32: 4. calfe; & they worshipped it, and said, these by thy Gods ô Israel, which have brought thee up out of the land of Aegipt. So they turned the image of the invisiblePsal. 106: 20. God into the likenesse of a calfe that eat∣ethRom. 1: 23. 25. grasse: and worshipped the creature in stead of the Creator, who is blessed for evermore Amen. This their sin did greatly displease the Lord, and his servant Moses; in so much, that the anger of Moses waxed so hot, that he brake the tables beneath the mount, wherein the law was written byExod. 32: 16. 19. the finger of God: & it so provoked the Lord to Jelousie; that had not Moses stood in the gap, & (as a faithfull media∣tor) earnestly interceded for them, theyExod. 32: 10. 11. had bin utterly consumed. Notwithstan∣ding they scaped not all togither shot-free,
but a great plague fell upon them; & (which is more) it seemeth, that the Lord with drew the visible signes of his presence which they enioyed in times past: and now the Lord would onlie send an Angell with them, in remembrance of his promise to Abraham, Isaac, & Jacob, to bring them into the promised land; though not that Angell of the covenant, which heretofore had gon with them, but only the ministration of some other An∣gell to destroye their enemyes before them. See Exod. 23: 20. 21. with Cap. 32: 34. and Cap. 33: 2. 3. 4, This being the sin, & punishment for the same, in this 33th chapter we have set forth unto us the reconciliation or at∣tonement made between God & his peo∣ple, & that by his servant Moses, who was the mediator & minister of the cove∣nant of works, as saith the scripture, the lawe was given by Moses, but faith &Iohn. 1: 17. truth came by Jesus Christ. In the making of which attonement we may note, first, the preparation thereunto which consi∣steth 1. in the evill tydinges brought unto the people, and their mourning & wee∣ping thereupon, being stript of their or∣naments
by the commandement of God▪ vers 4. 5. 6. 7. 2ly the removing of the tent or tabernacle of Moses out of the campe, from amongst this rebellious rout, signifying Gods displeasure against, and departure from his people▪ compare Nomb. 2: 17. with Psal. 10: 1. Pro. 15: 29. Secondly the reconciliation it selfe, contained from vers 11. to the end of the chapter; wherein we have first, Moses his expostulation with God. vers 12. Se∣condly, his earnest prayer grounded upon the causes of that expostulation. vers. 13. thirdly, Gods gratious answere. vers 14. frourthlie, Moses thankfull acceptation, and embraceing that promise of God. vers 15. wherin he doth (the more ear∣nestly to move God to the performaunce thereof) second or backe his former peti∣tion, with a deprecation against the con∣trarie, together with more reasons (as it were) to move the Lord to the perfor∣maunce thereof vers 16. where upon we have Gods renewing or reiterating of his gratious answere; and so the reconcilia∣tion is herein concluded betwene God, and his people Israel; as we may see more at large by the spetiall favors which God
sheweth unto Moses which are mentioned in the latter end of the chapter, & so forward. Nowe the wordes which I have parti∣culerly read doe containe in them the de∣precation of Moses the man of God, wherein he doth desire of the Lord, (and that earnestlie) that unlesse he would goe with them with his favour and presence, manifested by visible tokens and signes thereof, he would not remove them, from the place where nowe they were, which was in the vallie neare unto Mount Sinai where Moses had receaved the lawe from the mouth of God. If thy presence goe not with us carry us not up hence. Thy presence] the hebrew word is Pa∣neicha thy face (coming of Panah signi∣fying to turne or looke to &c.) which is diverslie used in the holie scriptures. Sometimes it signifyeth the presence or Heb. Panai. Exod. 33: 20▪ face of God as he is in his divine Majestie, the which cannot be seen or beheld by anie mortall eie whatsoeuer because he is invisible. Sometimes it is taken for anie visible manifestation of the glorie of his divine Majestie, such as was seen on the mount when he gave his
lawe unto his people Israel Psal. 68: 8. Isa. 64: 1. in Solomons Temple at Jeru∣salem▪ 1 King. 8: 11. to Ezekiel the pro∣phet, Ezek. 1. to the shepheards at the Luc. 2: 9. birth of Christ and the like. Otherwise it is taken for his presence or sight, as saith the psalmist, Psa. 139: 7▪ whither shall I flie from thy Heb. Mepha∣neicha. presence? Againe by the face of God is meant sometimes his anger ot indigna∣tion. Lam. 4: 16. Jer. 3: 12. So the greeke word is also interpreted. 1 Pet. 3: 12. the  VVth ps. 34: 16. Pheni. face of the Lord is against them that doe evill &c and sometimes his fa∣vour or good pleasure, Psal. 51: 11. and 80: 3. because the face sheweth both. The Chaldee paraphrase rendereth it here, God himselfe, saying, If thou goe not with us &c, as if he should saie, if thou direct us not in the way, by goeing before us, and working miracles for us &c. And indeed God is said to be with his people, when he manifesteth his presence by his workes either of mercie towardes them, or judgment against their enemies; and on the other hand, maie be said to be absent from them, when he doth with drawe the former testimonies of his full and free favour for a time; which he doth
manie times to trie the faith and patience of his people, or to cause them more highlie, and reverently to mynd and esteeme his excellent mercies. Micah. 3: 4. Hos. 5: 6. Soe that here by the pre∣sence of God we maie understand, the visible tokens and signes of his presence and favour which in time past they had enioyed, when the Lord marched before them, and brought them out of Egipt, and which nowe by their sinnes they had for a time deprived them selves of. For Moses doth not here onlie praie for the ordinary signes of Gods presence, whereof the world is generally made par∣taker in his daylie administrations for the preservation, guidaunce, and governe∣ment of it; but it is Gods spetiall presence; which he in this place beggeth. For though all the world be guided by his providence, & visitation; yet his presence doth not so plainlie appeare anie where, as it doth in governing of his church; as if he should saie, if thou doest not so goe before us, as that we maie as trulie perceive that thou art with us, as if we did behold or see thy verie face perfectlie before us &c. And therefore the force of
the hebrew word is (as the learned ob∣serve) not simplie thyface; but in the plurall nomber, thyfaces; as if he should saie, even thou thy selfe with al the tokens and manifestations of thy presence, whe∣reby our enemies may be destroyed be∣fore us, and we preserved, and kept in the waie wherein we goe. Which implyeth (as a learned Mr. Ayns∣vvorth. man noteth) Gods care and providence over his people by Christ. Heb. 1: 3. Howe ever it be, Moses sheweth his earnest desire to have the pre∣sence of God with them, and the great miserie which they should be in without it, in that he chuseth rather to perish in the wildernesse, than to goe further, without the certaine testimonie thereof, which maie be seene in the next verse, where in effect he saith, that the loving fa∣vour where with God had embraced his people, could not otherwise be knowne unlesse he remained with them. But wherefore did Moses thus greatlie desire the favour presence and protection of Almightie God to be with them? Su∣rely to bring them to that good land, the which he had promised to Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, a land flowing with-milke
and honey, which was a type and figure of that heavenly Canaan wherein they should enioy eternall peace and feli∣citie whom he had predestinated there unto, as the Israelites did in that land outward rest and peace for a long time: And the people of Israel having by their sins lost the testimonies of Gods presence, and yet commanded of God, to goe for∣ward unto that land, he therfore (to the end that they might truly prosper, and goe foorth with safetie and comfort in that which they were to doe) desireth the presence of God.1 Doct. Gods presence is cheifly to be desired in vveightie matters. So that the point of doctrine arising hence for our Instruction at present is cleare, namely: That in the performaunce of all holy duties, espetially matters that are of weight and great importance, the presence of God to goe with us is aboue all thinges to be desired and earnestly sought for. As it stood Moses upon in this case, so it concerneth the Church of Christ in all ages: and therefore we shall find that the people of God in former times when they were well advised, they would at no time take in hand any great matter but they
did first enquire of the Lord, and seeke his presence; and if they might not have it they chose to let the thing alone. The children of Iudg. 20: 12: 26. 27. 28. Israel would not goe to bat∣taile against their brethren the children of Benjamine, before they had enquired of the Lord. Ezra the preist and scribe of the lawe of God having received abun∣dance of silver and gold for the service of the house of the Lord from Artaxerxes the king and his princes, and being toEzra. 8: 22. 23: 31. 32. carie it to Jerusalem, he was ashamed to seeke for an armie of souldiers and horse∣men to convey them in safety thither, but proclaymed a fast, and besought the Lords presence, and he delivered them from the handes of their enemyes which laye in waite by the way, and brought them and their treasure in safety to Jeru∣salem. Nehemiah also that faithfull ser∣vaunt of God, hearing of the desolation ofNehem. 1: 4. the house of God, and citie, and sepul∣chres of his fathers, and being moved to helpe them in the worke of the Lord, seeketh first for the face and presence of God before he taketh his enterprise in hand. The like may wee see in HesterHest. 4: 16. the queene being to seeke to the king her
husband for the lives of her people. YeaActs. 1: 24. the eleven apostles themselves being to chuse one in the place of Judas, although they were largely instructed by the spi∣rit of God; yet they dare not doe it with∣out seeking the presence and helpe of God, being therein unto us a singular example, that matters of such great weight and importaunce, as is the chusing out of officers for the teaching exhortation and governement of the church of Christ should not lightly or unadvisedly be ta∣ken in hand, without earnest seeking unto God for his presence, direction and helpe in the same. Yea the presence of God hath bin acknowledged to be of such ne∣cessitie to be sought for, that even wicked and ungodly men have thought it a thing reasonable and expedient, to enquire of the Lord before they tooke in hand great enterprises: as we may see in Ahab who at the perswasion of Jehosaphat enquired2 Cron. 18: 4. 5. &c. at the word of the Lord, though he hear∣kened not unto it. To proceede yet further, verie heathenish and Idolatrous persons, which have not the knowledge of God or his word, have thus much by the instinct of nature, that what soeuer theyIsa. 19: 3.
doe esteeme their God, to it they seeke in their under taking of great and weigh∣tie affaires, though alas! their benefit be small, yea none at all: But if they, then much more the people of God, who worship the true God, who is able to doe for them what soeuer he pleaseth in the heavens, earth, and all deepe places, which the Gods of the heathen cannot; Much more (Isaie) are we to seeke to this our eternall and almightie father, (whose habitation is in heaven, and he ruleth all things by his mightie power), for his pre∣sence in all our holy and religious perfor∣mances, espetially matters of great weight, as is this thing which we have now in hand to seeke God for. And there is good reason for it, as1 Reason. namely, first God himselfe hath comman∣ded it of us, and doth commend it unto us in his word. Nowe what God hath in his word either commanded or commended to be done, that we are bound in duty to performe, and it is sin to neglect or omit the same: but God in his 1 Chron. 16: 11. Matth. 7: 7. word hath both commaunded the performaunce of this duty, to wit, to seeke his presence before we take in hand such great & weightie af∣faires:
therefore we must take heed howe we let slip the doeing of it. Secondly where Gods presence is,2 Reason. Psal. 16: 11. there is his blessing, favour and accepta∣tion, there the worke prospereth that is taken in hand, and there is good successe in the doeing of it: for it is in him weActs. 17: 2. live move and have our being, if he be not with us to blesse our life, if he with drawe but his presence, we perish and are gone. There is noe sacrifice that is done to him, which he blesseth unlesse his presence be in the doeing of it; there is no duty prospereth unlesse it be taken in hand in his name, and he be present to assist us in the performaunce of it: for heRevel. 1: . is the alpha and the omega, the begining and the end, it is he that must begin and perfect every good worke, or els we must ooke for no good begining or any pro∣sperous or happie issue. Thirdly, where Gods presence is there3 Reason. is God himselfe, and there is his spirit, for the persons of the Trinity are so united in one and the same essence, that they admit no division, or disjunction, but where the one is, there the other worketh: Nowe we knowe that the spirit Rom. 8: 26. helpeth
our Infirmities, and the wisdome of God is revealed unto us Nehem. 9: 20. 1 Cor. 2: 10. Eph. 1: 17. by his spirit, and without the wisdome of God we doe not knowe howe to begin or perfect any good worke, it is the spirit that helpeth 1 Iohn. 4: 1. us to trye the Spirits, to discerne be∣twene light and darknesse, betwene good and evill. And if in any action men have need of the helpe and wisdome of Gods spirit, then have we in this which we are goeing about, to discerne of the gifts and graces of God given unto men, and their qualifications for the service of God in his church, to knowe who is fit, and who is not fit, to discerne whome the Lord hath called and whome he hath not cal∣led. Fourthlie, where the presence of God4 Reason. is in the doeing and performing of anie thing▪ there that action being once done and performed, is blessed of God ever af∣ter: Therefore seing this thing which we are about, is a matter which we doe not for a day, or a moneth, or one parti∣culer occasion but it is that which (Jam perswaded) all of us desire to have blessed to us alwaies; and that we may not onlie comfortably, and with one heart goe on
nowe in the performaunce of the action it selfe of choise and ordination of ministers n the church; but that hereafter it may prove to the glorie of God, and our com∣fort, and benefit. If this be then our de∣sires and earnest intentions, what urgent reason and great occasion have we to de∣sire the presence of God. But what need is there to insist upon1 Vse of reproose. reasons of this doctrine? it is a point which no man will deny, but that it is of absolute necessity: I proceed therefore to applica∣tion. And first they come here justly to be reproued, that are so carelesse, & negligent many times in the doeing & performaunce of weightie matters, that they rush rudely and unadvisedlie to the doeing of them, without seeking for the presence of God to goe with them; as though the power were in their owne handes to bring to passe whatsoeuer they purpose, and not consider that they are mortall men whose breath is in their nostrils, and that without the Lord no man is able so much as to thinke a good thought, much lesse doe any good deed. Hence it is that men doe so often befoole themselves, and run into confusion, because they neglect
the performaunce of this first duty: for God he will be sought unto, or els it is just with him to bring the counsell of men to nought; for unlesse he build the house theyPsal. 127: 1. labour but in vaine that build it &c un∣lesse he advise and counsell us in this our undertaking, we maie doe that in hast which we may repent of by leasure. The Lord denounceth a woe by the mouth of the prophet Isaiah against his people (amongst other thinges) for this, saying they walke to goe downe into Egipt (andIsa. 30: 2. 3. have not asked at my mouth) to strength∣en themselves in the strength of Pha∣roah and to trust in the shadowe of Egipt: therefore shall the strength o Pharoah be your shame, and the trust in the shadowe of Egipt your confusion. Secondly, let us hence be exhorted,2 Vse. Exhortation. that seing we have nowe a great and weightie busines to take in hand, to wit▪ the chusing out from amongst us some to beare office in the church of Christ, either for governement or administra∣tion of the word and Sacraments, or both, as the Lord shall in mercie afford unto us: oh! let us therefore with unfeigned affections, and earnest desires, humble
our selves before God, and earnestly desire his presence to be with us, in the doeing and performing of the same. The LordPsal. 105: 4. Psal. 27: 8. calleth upon us in this matter even nowe to seeke his face, if we will have good∣successe; and we should be ready, and saie with the psalmist, thy face Lord will we seeke; and not onliewsay it, but also even nowe presently to fall on doeing of it, and that with all our might and never give over till he heare. Certainly he will not stop his eares against us; if we doe but seeke him with fervent faith and due preparation of heart. And therefore that may be an other profittable and seasonable use of this doctrine for us at this time, and it is of3. Vse. Examination▪ admonition to us, and it may prove whol∣some advice if we take good heed unto it: to wit; Doe we desire the presence of God to be with us, and his blessing upon us, in the things we take in hand? then let us examine our selves, whither the Lord hath fitted and prepared us (or rather whither we have not made our selves unfit) for such worthie enioyments, as are his ordinaunces, his word and Sacra∣ments, to be lively preached, and admini∣stred
among us; and the administration of the affaires of Christs kingdome to be performed in their due manner, that is, by such officers as he hath appointed in his word for that purpose. Let us therefore first examine our sel∣ves,1 Examin∣ion. whither wee have the true sence and feeling of our owne nakednesse, want and povertie, howe that we are as sheepe without a sheepheard, and by that meanes in danger of the raving wolfe, and doe therefore in the sence and feeling of this our want and necessitie, desire such to be sent unto us, that we may be defended from the outrage of our adversarie, by their diligent and carefull watching over our soules? doe we see that we are as a body without eies? as a towne without walls? and doe we desire to have these wants supplied that thereby the power of professed adversaries may be kept out, and homebred conspiracies and treache∣ries looked into and prevented? doe we feele our selves as a garden without an inclosure, or hedge; and therefore we earnestly desire one, that the wilde boare may be kept out from rooting up the plants which God hat set in his orchard?
If we have this sence and feeling; then we are in some measure fit for the Lord to bestowe such favours upon us; for he will have us Math. 5: 6. hungrie, before he feede us, he will have us senceable of our Reu. 3: 17. nak∣ednesse before he cloth us: for when we feele our owne wants, then doe we re∣ceive his blessings and favours the more thankfullie. But on the other hand, if we be so without feeling or sence as that we are indifferent or carelesse herein myn∣ding that if we have them it is good, if we have them not we doe not much care our condition is nowe well enough; I saie if this carelesse affection be in us, it makes us altogether unfit for God's mer∣cies. Secondly consider, and examine with2 Examina∣tion. our selves, what it is that hath made us to be deprived of these favours (thus long) which nowe we desire and hope to at∣taine. Is it because the Lord's hand isIsa. 59: 1. 2. shortened that it cannot save, or his eare heavie that it cannot heare? No doubt∣lesse, for there is with him no chaunging; he remaineth the same for ever, and his yeares doe not faile: but the scripture tels us plaine, yea and our woefull expe∣rience
doth preach it unto us with open mouth, and if we our selves see it not, our neighbours can tell us, that it is our sinnes that haue separated betwene God and us, and our Iniquities have made him hide his face from us. If ever it were for the sinnes of the Jewes that the citie Jerusalem was Ier. 26: 6. And 44: 22. made a curse, and an ab∣homination, and hissing to the nations that were round about her; and the house which was built for the service of God was made as Shiloh; and they themselves captivated in a straunge land: then surely it is for our sinnes that the famous church in this city, whereof manie of us have bin members, hath bin thus ruinated and troden under foote, and the members dispersed one from an other, and that not by the handes of an enemy, but (which is lamentable) they have slaine and de∣voured one an other (God having first bereaved us of those learned and wise watchmen that have by their wisdome, or rather the wisdome of God in them kept us together) in so much that we have bin a wonder and an astonishment to peoples both neare and farre of, both friendes and enemies; our freindes pitying us, and
mourning for us, but not being able by their Counsell to helpe us; and our ene∣mies rejoyceing and making a mocke at us. Let us then further examine our sel∣ves, and rip up our owne hearts, and con∣sciences; to try and see whither we have trulie repented of those thinges, which have moved the Lord to deprive us of them: for unlesse we have done this, it is but in vaine for us to presume to seeke these ordinaunces of God at his handes, for we shall not have them; but it maie justly be said to us as the Lord saith to the wicked, what hast thou to doe to declare my statutes, or that thou shouldest takePsal. 50: 16. my covenant in thy mouth? seing thou hatest instruction &c. So what have we to doe to celebrate Gods ordinances, if wee have not purged our selves of that leven of mallice and roote of bitternesse, for the which the Lord hath deprived us of them, yea and to this day doth keepe them from us; or if we have them bestow∣ed upod us, it may be to our further and greater judgment, the Lord may deale with us as he did with his people Israel of old, give us a king in his anger and take him away in his wrath, yea, he mayHosea. 13: 11.
give us statutes that are not good, andEzek. 20: 25. judgments whereby we should not live. For what the apostle saith of receiving the Lord's supper, that may be applied in a sort to this thing in hand, yea it is in part the same, who soeuer shall eate this bread, and drinke this cup of the Lord1 Cor. 11: 29. unworthily, eateth and drinketh damna∣tion to himselfe, not discerning the Lord's bodie. Therefore the exhortation which the Apostle giveth in that case may come verie seasonablie unto us at this time; ButVers. 23. let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of this bread, and drinke of this cup. For repentaunce, and amendement of life, is that salve which cures up these sores, it is a soveraigne medicine to purge away the wrath and displeasure of God from us, it is that which he hath promised to have respect unto, for the Lord is gratious and2 Chro. 30: 3. mercifull, mightie in pardoning, readie to forgive the sins of his people, he will not turne away his face from us if we returne unto him. Therefore the Lord doth earne¦stly exhort his people by his prophets to amend their wayes & their doeings, & toJer. 26: 13. obey his voice; & then he will repent him of the evill, that he hath pronounced aga∣inst
them, yea there is nothing which God doth more desire, than that a sinner should returne from his wicked wayes and live. And therefore we shall finde that those which have truly feared the Lord have soDan. 9: 3. 4. 15: 20. &c. Ezra. 9: 5. 6. &c. humbled themselves, and confessed their sinnes, and the sins of their fathers, and brethren, and have found great mercy at the hands of the Almightie. So that I hope nowe, that there is no man amongst us but will confesse that this point of exa∣mination of our repentaunce is a thing of great importaunce, and that it standeth us in hand to looke to it, least in stead of receaving a blessing we receive a greater judgment than yet we have felt. Nowe I would not be understood as if I meant that anie man can so throughly and so fully repent as we ought; but hath our repen∣taunce bin serious, and from the heart?Ioel. 2: 13. have we found our hearts at any time in some measure truly greived for the sinnes which we have committed, and that with a true sence and feeling of them, and the nature of them, howe haynouslie we have thereby offended our heavenly father, and grieved our poore brethren, and caused his truth to be reproached? for it
is the Pro. 23: 26. Isa. 62: 2. 1 Sam. 16: 7. heart that God requireth, and which he looketh into; and though a man doe with 1 Kin. 21: 27. Achab rent his clothes, put sackcloth upon his flesh, and fast and lye in sackcloth and goe softly, yea like the penitentiall papists goe barefoote and punish his body, and with the Israelites afflict his soule for a day, and hang downeIsa. 58: 5. his head like a bull rush; yet if his heart be not truly touched, the Lord is so farre from accepting such repentaunce, or ser∣vice,Isa. 29: 13. as that he accompteth it abomina∣tion. Or have we not on the other hand deceaved our selves, and made the world beleeve we have repented, when wee have not bin once touched with the sence of them in our inward affections? have we not only made bare acknowledgments, that we might be reconciled to our bre∣thren, and increase our congregation being more troubled for the outward rentings, divisions, and depopulation which wee daylie underwent through the just judg∣ment of God, than for the dishonour which we have done to our Lord and ma∣ker, and scandal we have laid upon the truth? but have not lamented in secret betwene God and our owne soules. If
this be wanting in us, I meane this true & unfaigned repentaunce from the heart, it is yet too soone for us to take this wor∣ke in hand. Take heed, God is not mock∣ed,Gal. 6: 7. and therefore if there be anie of us that upon due examination shall finde himselfe herein guiltie (there being none but shall indeed finde them selves faultie, and to have come farre short of that hear∣tie humiliation that should have bin) let us nowe even while it is called to daie turne to Ioel. 2: 12. 13. the Lord with all our heartes, and with fasting and with weeping and with mourning and rent our hearts and not our garments; and turne unto the Lord our God: for he is gratious and mer∣cifull, slowe to anger, and of great kind∣nesse, and repenteth him of the evill: forHosra. 6: 1. he it is that hath torne and he will heale us; he hath smitten, and he will bind us up. And let us not feare or despaire, though we have heretofore neglected, and made light of our repentance; yet if we now (I say even now) at this present, con∣sider our wayes, and repent; the Lord will shew us mercie: for he hath pro∣mised that at what time soeuer a sinner doth repent him of his sin from the bot∣tome
of his heart he will blot out his ini∣quity, and his sin will he remember no more. I speake not this (bretheren) out of any doubting that I have of anie particuler mans repentance, or to lay any load of great repentance upon others, & to make myne owne light (for I know my selfe in these things to be much stained) but becaus the heart of man Ier. 17: 9. is deceitfull aboue all things; I therfore speake this to 1 Cor. 4: 14. warne both my selfe and you, that we maie consider our waies, and Heb. 12: 13. make straight steps unto our feet, least that which is lame be turned out of the way, but rather should be healed; that so we may now (if it be the will of God) heale up that wound which we have (by our sins) made in our owne consciences. Againe, if we be come thus farre, and3 Examina∣tion. have done this which hath bin spoken; and have the testimony of a good conscience to witnesse the same unto us in the pre∣sence of God: Then let us yet further examine our selves, whither it be now our purpose and resolution, and doe we earnestly desire and intend (by Gods help and assistance) to take heed of our car∣riage and conversation for time to come,
concerning those thinges, wherein here∣tofore we have bin such great trespassers? Whereas heretofore (when we enioyed the ministerie of the word and Sacra∣ments, and other ordinances of God in a glorious manner, in so much that some of those that were partakers of that com∣fortable estate have confessed that we were even as an army with banners) we have walked unthankfully towards God, uncharitably towards others, being lifted up with our owne prosperous estate; yea not so respectfully and carefully towards those whom the Lord had set over us as we should and ought to have done, but grieving their righteous soules with our strifes contentions, and disorderly car∣riages: is it now our earnest desires to amend all these thinges, and to walke ever hereafter in thankfull obedience to∣wardes our most mercifull God, (who hath hitherto kept us, notwithstanding those our iniquities) in Godly submission to such officers and elders as the Lord shall bestowe upon us, knowing that they watch for our soules as men that mustHeb. 13: 17. give an account; in tender love and mu∣tuall affection one towardes an other, as
members of that mysticall bodie whereof Christ is the head, not biting and de∣vouring, but comforting and cherrishing one an other, labouring to keepe the uni∣tie of the Spirit in the bond of peace, andGal. 6: 2. to beare one an others burdens and so ful∣fill the law of Christ? If this be now our purpose and resolution; then let us not doubt, but (if we continue our earnest seeking for it) we shall have Gods pre∣sence and favourable countenance with us, and his blessing upon us. Then will he Isa. 1: 26. restore our Judges as at the first, and our counsillors as at the begining: after∣wards we shalbe called the city of right¦eousnes, the faithfull citie. Then will the Lord give us Ier. 3: 15. pastours according to his owne heart, which shall feed us with knowledge and understanding. Then shall we know, if we follow on to know the Lord: q his goeing forth is prepared asHosra 6: 3. the morning, and he shall come unto us as the raine; as the latter and former raine unto the earth. But if we continue still in our old course of contention, strife, emulation, division, dishonouring of our heavenly father by prophanation of his holy day with our unprofittable disputes,
and needlesse vexations one of an other; abusing of his ordinances upon every tri∣viall matter, which our owne wils and uncharitable dispositions doe beget and ingender: it will be then in vaine for us to boast and say, the temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord, the templeIerem. 7: 4. of the Lord are we; they will prove but lying wordes in our mouthes, for the Lord will surely cast us out of his sight, as heVers 15. hath cast out our bretheren, other visible churches, which we have both read, and heard of in the scriptures, and also in other histories, besides our owne woefull experience. Thē we shall wish the moun∣taines to hide us, and the hils to cover us from the wrath of the Almightie. Then2 Pet. 2: 22. it wilbe said of us according to the com∣mon proverbe, the dog is turned to his old vomit againe, and the sow that was washed to her wallowing in the mire. Oh! then shall we rewe the time that ever we made a shew of repentance for these evils, for it will turne to our geater condemnation, and our relapse will be more dangerous than our first disease. For had we through blind zeale continued still in our old perverse courses, perswad∣ing
our selves (as some of our bretheren doe who continue still in them) that we have done well, and we could not doe otherwise; we might have some hope, at least, that we should be beaten but with few stripes: but now God having opened our eyes, and we having seen and confes∣sed that we have sinned, and yet againe returne thereunto; there wilbe no place to plead ignorance, but we must expect to be beaten with manie stripes; and that which our Saviour Christ sayd to the Pharisees should, not unfitly, in such a case be applyed to us; if ye were blindIohn. 9: 41. you should have no sin, but now ye say, we see, therfore your sin remayneth. For we know what the Apostle Peter saith (and the scripture maketh me tremble to∣cote it) If after they have escaped the pol∣lutions2 Pet. 2: 20: of the world, through the know∣ledge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, they are againe intangled therein, and overcome, the latter end is worse with them than the begining &c. Furthermore, let us examine our sel∣ves,4 Examina∣tion. whither we desire to have these fa∣vours bestowed upon us most of all and principally for the glory of God; that his
word may be powerfully, and effectually ught amongst us; his Sacraments ad∣inistred; and church ruled and governed cording to his word and will; that we ay be watched over, and exhorted, re∣oved and admonished of our miscar∣ages, from time to time, that so Christ ay raigne and rule in our hearts: and hither we doe not rather seeke them for tward pompe and formality, that we ay have teachers and elders as well as thers, and that we may have the reproach kē off from us which now we undergoe, ecaus we have neither pastor nor teacher, or ruling elder over us. Yea doe we ot many of us desire it cheifly for our wne private ends, that we may have our hildren baptised, that so that shame may e taken from them, not much caring therwise if we had never the word ore powerfully taught amongst us than ow it is, when every one speaketh as his pirit moueth him, and doth even what e pleaseth; for now (being without go∣ernours) we enioy our liberty as we ink, where as it may be (as we are too oo ready to feare) if we have a pastor, or eacher, or ruler, he will sometimes be
blaming our disorder, and so seeke  abridge us of our liberty and bring us in bondage. I speake not, but that som of those former respects may in a sort  mynded of us in the desireing hereof, b we must take heed that that be not o chiefe and principall end wherefore w seeke them. Our greatest ayme must b the glory of God; the which if wee d unfeignedly seeke, it shalbe well: if no the Lord will not honour us with t bestowing of these things upon us; f they that honour me, I will honour, sai1 Sam. 2: 30. the Lord. There is yet an other use which th4. Ʋse. Of admoni∣tion. point affordeth, and it is of caution forewarning unto us; that if we doe d¦sire the presence of Almighty God to g with us in this great and weighty matte then let us be forewarned and take he that we walke circumspectly herein, n as fooles, but as wise men; not being c¦ried away with an inconsiderate zeal and desire to the thing it self; but let the be with all a mixture of wisdome, a the feare of God in our myndes: and  we goe to God in prayer for his presen and assistance; so also let us enter into, a
proceed in the performance of this choice and election in such a way and manner as God hath prescribed in his holy word. For we know what our Saviour Christ hath promised, that where two or three are ga∣theredMat. 18: 2. together in my name there am I in the mid'st of them; whereas though twen∣ty yea two hundred, yea manie thousands should be met together, & it be not in the name of Christ, that is, according to his will revealed in his testament, he hath no pre∣sence to be stowe upon them: for it is with them that doe & teach all things as he hath commanded with whom he hath promised to be Mat. 28▪ 20. alwayes unto the end of the world. Let us therefore (laying aside all res∣pect or favour of any mans person, or by end or respect to our selves) with upright earts, and sincere desires lay before us he word of God, which is that infallible ule, wch can not erre; and thereby let us rie and judge the Spirits one of an other, nd the gifts and qualifications where with God hath endued and furnished us is people; and see whither we can in good onscience find any among us in some good measure qualified, as God in his word hath required in sundrie places
thereof; but principally in the first epist∣le to Timotheus and the 3 d chapter, and in the first chapter of the epistle of Paul to Titus; in which two severall places we have the qualifications of such persons at large declared. To which we shall doe well to take heed, and with good diligence to consider of them: and if we doe (upon this our carefull search and inquiry, together with our earnest prayers to God for the assistance of his good Spirit therein) find any such persons among us, as we can with good assurance esteem worthy to take upon them any of the offices which at the present we are distitute of; we may with good courage and boldnesse goe on to the chusing of them, and certainly the Lord will not faile to be with us; whereas otherwise it were better we should withdraw our sel∣ves, and with patience waite upon the Lord, untill he shalbe pleased to send us such. And if we continue in his feare, we have this for our comfort, that he willHb. 13: 5. not leave us, nor forsake us. And thus I have don with the first branch or part of this deprecation of Mo∣ses; if thy presence goe not with us: it
remaineth that I speake some what briefly of the other member of it; to wit carry us not hence. Where it may (for expli∣cations sake) be demaunded, wherefore Moses speaketh thus unto the Lord? To which it may be answered, that surely Moses had great reason to desire rather to abide in the wildernesse, and to per∣rish there, than to goe forward towards the land of Canaan without the presence of God: becaus first, if God should not be the leader and conductor of his people, as in times past be had bin bringing them out of Egipt, they should fall into the enemyes handes, and many dangers over take them▪ their enemies being farre greater and stronger than they. Secondly, the place where now they were was much more free from the enemy, than were the other places and countries through which they must passe in their journie; for here the enemyes came not upon them being as it were in a desolate place where were no inhabitants. Thirdly it were farre more safe for them to stay than to remove farther becaus the nations their enemyes were alwaies much moved against them, when they saw them marching in upon
them; thinking they came to invade thir landes; but so long as they journeyed not, but remained still in their tents, they could not so much suspect it; neither doe we read that at such times they did ordi∣narily rise up to resist them. Besides in journeying from that place to the land of Canaan, they were to goe through not one only, but the confines of many coun∣tries, and therefore if one did not fight against them, or fighting not prevaile, it might well be expected that an other might, if not an other, yet a third and if not one, yet many joyning their strength and forces together might easily over∣throwe them, if they had not a suffitient guide and captaine to goe with them, such as were able to deliver them from them all, which was only God. So that (these thinges thus considered) it may appeare that the children of Israel had bin in poore case, if they had not with them the presence of God; and Moses therfore had suffitient ground to pray thus as the text declareth and thence2. Doctrine Misery ac∣companieth those that are vvithout God's pre∣sence. may arise this second point or observa∣tion, namely, That it is a miserable and unhappie thing to be without, or
deprived of the presence, and favour of the Lord, in any estate whatsoeuer. This we may see here in Moses, who desired rather to stay in a solitary place, than to goe into that good land of Canaan with∣out God's presence. The reason is, be∣caus  where Gods presence is lacking, there is nothing but confusion and distraction: as we may see in that example of the children of Israel, who presumed, and would goe up unto the land which the Lord had promised, not with standingNumb. 14: 42. 43. &c. that Moses had (from the mouth of the Lord) charged them not to goe up, becaus the Lord was not with them; yet they presuming contrary to the com∣mandement given unto them, how were they discomfitted and smitten? It is an example worthy of our espetiall notice, and may serve for a good caution to all to take heed how they attempt the doing of matters upon their owne wils and powers, without the will and power of God. The Lord also (by the mouthIsa. 30: 1. 2. 3. &c. of his prophet Isaiah) complaineth great∣ly of the rebellion of Israel, becaus they tooke counsell but not of him, they walked to goe downe into Egipt (and
asked not at his mouth) and strengthen themselves in the strength of Pharaoh, and to trust in the shadow of Egipt; wherefore he threatened, that the strength of Pharaoh should he their shame, & the trust in the shadow of Egipt, their con∣fusion. The which may yet further2 Chron. 18: 18. 19. 25. 33. &c. be manifested in the example of Ahab king of Israell who (notwithstanding Micajah the prophet of the Lord had warned him of the danger of goeing up to Ramath Gilead, and that if he went he should fall there) would presume to goe up, trusting to his false and lying prophets, and not regarding the word of the Lord: but what successe he had in his bold enterprise the historie doth at large declare. So that we may behold the truth of that which Solomon saith in his proverbes, there is no wisdome, nor understanding, nor counsell against the Lord. For as in the presence andProv. 21. 30. favour of God there is life▪, comfort and good successe; so in the lack of his pre∣sence there is no thing but woe and mi∣serie. Seing then it is so that the enioying  of Gods presence is so happy, and such
prosperity and good successe cometh by the having and enioying of it, and the not having of it bringeth all miserie; let us be exhorted to take heed and beware of that which is the cause wherefore we ate deprived of his presence, and wherefore the Lord doth not goe forth with our armies as in times past; which is Sin: and let us flye from it, as from deadly poyson, which though it be sweete and dilitious in the taste, yet is deadly in the operation; and et us by all means labour to avoid it, as Solo∣mon counselleth his sons to avoyd harlots houses, whose lips drop as an honie combe, and their foot steps take hold of death. To conclude, wee see here that Mo∣ses doth rather chuse to content him∣selfe with a meane and lowe estate, a solitary and desolate life in a land which was barren, and fruitlesse, where they had no thing but Mannah to feed on, than to goe into that great and good land whereof the Lord had spoken unto them, which flowed with milke and honie, with, out the visible tokens and signes of God's presence. Whence
we may also note, That a meane and3 Doctrine. lowe estate with supplie of our absolute necessities; is better than great dignity, without the blessing of God. For it is the Prov, 10: 22. blessing of God that maketh rich and he addeth no sorrow with it, as saith the wise man. And Prov. 17: 1. better (saith he) is a dry morsell and quietnesse there∣with than an housefull of sacrifices with strife. And better is a dynner of herbes where love is, than a stalled oxe; and hat∣redPr. 15: 17. therewith. Let this point serve for instruction  to us in this our businesse and occasion in hand: and let us not be so earnest to have our Church estate and condi∣tion dignified, by setting up gover∣nours and rulers over us; as to seeke to have the presence of God among us. And therefore now it remayneth that we poure out fervent and earnest prayers unto God, that he wilbe pleased to shine upon us with his favourable coun∣tenance, and goe with us in that which we shall take in hand, and doe, about this great and weightie matter; and if he refuse to goe with us therein, judgeing none amongst us fit for or
worthy of this ministery, and service in his church; let us content our selves with that present estate wherein God hath already set us, patiently resting upon the good will and pleasure of our hea∣venly father, following herein the example of the Kingly prophet David in an other case who flying from the persecution of his son Absolom, sent ack the Arke of the Lord by Zadok2 Sam. 15: 25. 26. unto the citie and said: If I shall find favour in the eies of the Lord, he will shew me both it and his habita∣tion. But if he thus say, I have no delight in thee: Behold here am I et him doe to me as seemeth good unto him. In like manner let us1 Pet. 5: 6. humbly and patiently submit our sel∣ves under the mightie hand of our good God, labouring to glorifie him n this, our present condition, and o bring forth fruits Luc. 3: . worthy of amen∣dement of life, being thankfull for those favours which he hath already bestowed on us: and no doubt but God in his good time will increase and multiply his loving kindnesses and mer∣cies towards us; for the Lord will
not forsake his people, for his great na∣mes1 Sam. 12▪ 22. sake: becaus it hath pleased the Lord to mnke you his people. THE END.
IACOB'S ANSWERE Unto JƲDAH'S PLEA For The taking of Benjamin into Aegipt. An excercitation performed on the Lords day the 15th of October 1641. Upon the 43 Chap. of Ge∣nesis being the portion of scrip∣ture which fell in order the same day to be read to the Church. Genes. Cap. 43. IN this chapter we have our father Iacob commanding his sons (the second time) to goe downe into Aegipt to buy food to relieve him, and them, and his houshold, in the famine which was sore and grie∣vous, as well in the land Canaan (wherein Jaakob sojourned) as in other Countries. But becaus Joseph had (at their first goe∣ing downe) protested unto them, that
they should not see his face again, unlesse (Benjamin) their younger brother were with them; and their father had (out of his tender affection to his youngest son) refus∣ed before this to send him with them, Cap. 42: 38. therfore now the sons of Jacob alledge many reasons to their father to ex∣cuse their obedience to this his command▪ unlesse he would send their yonger brother with them: which, Iacob wisely weigheth; and (considering with himselfe their neces∣sity, and the good conditions offered him for the safeguard of his deare sonne) at length yeildeth to their request; and send∣eth Benjamine his yongest sonne, and wt him also a present from himself of the good thinges of the land of Canaan. Wherein we painly perceive (though unwittingly to Iacob) as in the former chapter the fulfilling of Ioseph's first drea∣me Gen. 37: 7. 8. so in this the accom∣plishment of the second of his dreames Gen. 37: 9. that the sun and moone and eleven starres did obeysance to him: and so a ratifying of that word of God, which saith, My counsell shall stand and I will fulfill all my pleasure. Isa. 46: 10. For though there are many devises inProv. 19: 21.
man's heart, nevertheles the counsell ofProv. 21: 30. he Lord that shall stand; becaus (as Solo∣mon saith) there is no wisdome, nor un∣derstanding, nor counsell against the Lord. Though the affections of Iacob were never so much upon Benjamine, and he formerly strove against his sons about the ending of him: yet at length, he must part with him; becaus God had purposed it. Wherein we may see the providence & power of God; over ruling and disposing the purposes and actions of men; accor∣ing to the proverbe Man purposeth, but God disposeth. Wee have also in this chapter, the entertaynement which they had, the second time with Joseph; which was (though still estrangeing himself from them yet) with the manifestation of greater kindnesse and favour, than for∣merly, though the sons of Iacob (having guilty consciences) made no comfortable se of it, being strucken with great feare and terrour, thinking every thing which was done unto them (though never so favourably) to be for their punishment and increase of sorrowe. In whom we
may plainly see what a hell and tormen men carry about them, that have the guiltinesse of their consciences accom∣panying them, and have not the heart to unburden themselves by a sincere repen∣tance before God for their sin. And also we may observe in them how God doth by degrees (after he hath given men the sight of their sin) lift them up and com∣fort them; that they may have the deeper sence of the difficulty in getting out of sin, that so they may feare to fall againe into transgression, and labour to make much of, and highly to prize a quiet con∣science. In the chapter, we maie orderly ob∣serveThe chapter divided into generall parts. these generall parts;  first, thei second goeing into Egipt together wth their fathers advise, counsell, and prayer for their prosperity in their journey; to vers 16. Secondly,  the feare and ter∣rour which befell them, after their com∣ing thither, by reason of their being brought into Joseph's house; and thei manifestation of the same to Joseph's ste∣ward, and his comfortable communing with them thereupon; to vers 26. Third∣ly,  the entertaynement which Joseph
giveth unto them, werein he manifesteth is naturall affection, and brotherly love o them all, but espetiallie to his brother enjamine; for he was the son of his other; and was also innocent of the evill hich his other bretheren were guilty of. rom thence, to the end of the chapter.The first generall di∣vided, into particulers. The first generall part of this chapter whereon my purpose is to insist by God's sistance) offereth to our consideration hese particulers; first the occasion of  acob's commanding his sons to goe gain into Egipt to buy food; which was he extremity of the famine, and their ending of the corne, which formerly hey had brought from thence. vers 1. econdly, the disputation of Iacob and  s sons, and espetially of Judah, concer∣ng the taking of Benjamine with them.  erse. 11. Where (by the way) it may e demanded, wherefore Judah (before he others) is prolocutor or chiefe speaker t this time, seing he was not the eldest,  ut the fourth sonne of Iacob? To which  may be answered that, for the eldest, which was Reuben, he had before spoken r, and requested the same; (yea) andGen. 42: 37. ffered the lives of his owne two sons for
the security of Benjamine: but could no prevaile, and that (as it may be very pro¦bably) not only, becaus Iacob was no then so sore bitten with the necessity  which now constrained him to yeild  but also he might minde the lightnes oGen. 35: 22. Reuben in defyling his fathers bed; an being unfaithfull in that, he might b much more unfaithfull concerning h brother; and therfore the lesse to be reg¦arded of Iacob in that his request. An as for Simeon the second son, he was no bound in Egipt, and could not be prese to speake; though if he had bin presen he might also not have bin well accepte of, and so likewise his brother Levi th third, beaus they two were bretheren iGen 34: 30. iniquitie, and men of blood; as maie b seene in the case of the Shechemites. B Judah, being the next in order, and exce¦ling all the rest (that were now wit Iacob) in the gifts and endowments of th body and mynd (as appeareth Gen. 49 8. 9. &c.) he first maketh bold to she to his father the danger and vanity of the journie, if they had not their brother Be¦jamine with them. Where it maie be also yet furtber ob¦jected,
whither Judah doth not speake nseemly to his father vers 5. and so trans∣resse the law of God, and light of na∣ure, which requireth honour and obedi∣nce unto parents to all their lawfull ommands? This being a lawfull com∣mand, to goe and buy food in necessity, t maie be said, that he ought not thus to ave reasoned, but to have gone his way.  To which it may also be answered, that he greatest necessity ought not to give lace to the lesse. And that which Judah doth here speake, is only to instance the necessity of Benjamines goeing with hem, to wit, that otherwise they should all perrish, and Benjamine also. He giveth the reason vers 3. as if he should ay, It is in vaine for us to goe downe without him; yea we shall doe it to our resent danger; for it shall come to passe, that not onlie we shall not have food for our money according to thy expectation and desire, and so thou and Benjamine thy sonne who is so tender in thine eies, and our wives and children shall dye in the famine: but also we shalbe adjudged Spies and traitors to the Countrie, and so be hanled as malefactours. Therfore
he laboureth by laying before his father the greater necessity, to bend his af∣fection, and to remove him from his for∣mer purpose and resolution. Where (by the way) we maie also note, that parents sometimes ignorantlie doe erre in their purposes and commands, as did Iacob doubtlesse something (unwittingly) in his rash resolution about Benjamine. And in such cases Iudah's carriage here de∣serveth imitation; that where and when parents doe command such thinges, as are too great and difficult for children to obey, it is their duty (not unreverently (at the first dash) to denie obedience, but) modestly and with reverence fir to lay downe their reasons, that so they may remove their parents from their un∣reasonable injunctions. Thirdly, we have in this first generall  part of the chapter Iacob's assent to Judah's arguments; and his fatherlie coun∣sell and prayers for their good successe i their journie vers 11. 12. 13. 14. O which it is my purpose more particulerly to treate. In which verses maie be ob∣served, first, Iacob's assent to let Ben∣jamine  goe vers 11. 13. Secondly, hi
grave and wise counsell and directions, or their better speeding in their journie, nd for the more safety of his sonne vers  1. 12. And thirdly, his prayer unto God  or them vers 14. In the former of these may be noted,VVhat moved Iaecob to le Benjamin goe into Egipt. hat it was which moved Iacob to let Benjamine goe? to wit, Judah's argu∣ments, from whence Iacob himself (dili∣ently considering them in his mind) de∣uceth an absolute necessity that it must e so, and he could no longer resist or op∣ose it, intimated in these words, if it ust be so &c vers 11. Where we may ehold Iacob in the midst of a great con∣ict, or (to speake in the Apostle's words)  in a strait betwix two. On the one hand* Philip. 1: 23. aken with a tender affection to, and great are of Benjamine, his deare and beloved onne; on the other hand with necessity nd famine, in danger of losse of his owne fe, and the life of his family; and ther∣ore in this strait, yeildeth to the greater ecessity, and admitteth Iudah's plea, and romise of his son's safeguard; whereupon e granteth that Benjamine shall goe with hem. Here it may yet further be demanded,
why Iacob would not commit Benjamin to Reuben, under a greater caution, and bond of performance, as seemeth by the wordes, Cap. 42. 37. but doth now to  Iudah, and that upon lesse? whereunto it may be yet further answered (beside that which formerly hath bin said) first▪ that Iudah was well respected by hi father, and deare unto him for the wis∣dome and vertue which was in him mo than in Reuben; which made Iacob giv audience and credit to his speech: whe¦reas Reuben was in a sort hated or co¦temned of his father, becaus of the wron he did him in respect of his concubine And this, we may perceave by commo experience to be an argument of gre force. For the vile estimation of a ma person maketh manie times the goo giftes which he hath receaved, to be litt regarded; yea sometimes despised: and o the other hand meane gifts in a perso respected are had in honour. Therfor it greatly standeth them upon, who hav giftes and endowments of the mynd, t adorne them with a good deportment o conversation; that so the administratio of their giftes may be the more effectuall
Yet it can not be justifyed, that where hat is wanting or imperfect, the good gifts of God should not be regarded: for hey ought to be mynded as coming from God (the author of all good things) though the instrument sometimes be not so much o be set by. Againe the caution or  condition propounded by Reuben was foolish unadvised, and wicked; yea unna∣turall; and therefore justly by his father rejected, and not accepted of, seing he offered the life of his two sons, in the place of one brother; he doth manifest thereby that he meant not so sincerely to seeke the preservation of his brother, as he did (by a large proffer) to get him out of his fathers handes for his owne safeguard, and the filling of his bellie. For if naturall affection had learned him, to value the preservation and safetie of one brother, it would also have taught him much more to prize the lives of two sons. But it was to be feared (considering his former lightnesse) that if he had prevail∣ed, he would have bin carelesse of his brother Benjamine; and when he should have bin taken with the cup in his sack (as afterwards it came to passe) that he
would have left him there as a bond slave, and have shifted for himself, having got∣ten corne for their supply in the famine, and not have gone back and interceded for him offering his owne person in the stead of his brother, notwithstanding hi promise. For he could not but know well enough, that though Benjamine were made awaie, or kept in Egipt, (which would have greatly grieved Iacob) ye Iacob had more wisdome, feare of God, and naturall affection, than to kill two grandchildren, and so to increase his losse. But this is ordinary with wicked and foo∣lish men, to promise in folio, though they can not perform in decimo sexto; ye promise largely, let the performance come how it will. If they can but ob∣taine that which they seeke, it is suffitient. If they can but borrow, let who will pay. But on the other hand the promise of Iudah, was sober, grave, wise, and also reasonable; and such as savoured of an honest and upright heart, ready to doe his uttermost indeavor to performe: and therefore he is carefull before hand to make his proposition or promise no larger than he knew (by God's help) himself
able to performe and effect; or at least, if there were a breach through inability, the damage might only fall upon himselfe. Finally the speech of Reuben was out of  season to prevaile with Iacob; becaus then they had good store of corne being newly come out of Egipt the first time with their sacks full; but now they were in extreame want and necessity, their corne being spent: So that need maketh Iudah's speech seasonable to and prevail∣ent wch Iacob. A word spoken in season,Prov. 15: 23. And 25: 11. how good is it? yea it is like apples of gold in pictures of silver. Vers 11. And their father Israel said,Vers 11. if it must be so now &c. These wordes include or containe in them (as hath bin before touched) the assent of Iacob to that wch before had bin spoken by Iudah his son. Wherein Jacob doth present unto us a memorable example of humility, and readinesse to learne and be instructed. Humility in that he doth not despise or contemne the arguments or reasoning of his sonne; but humbleth himself so low as to give audience to him. Readinesse and willingnes to be better taught and learned; in that, though before he had
purposed, and absolutlie given it fo answere, not to part with his son Benja∣mine, and that for divers reasons by him expressed Cap. 42: 37. yet having no (in a seasonable time) strong argument produced to move him to alter his judg∣ment, and resolution, he hearkeneth to them; and having not anie thing of weight, wherewith to reply, he neither seeketh starting holes, or evasions, to pu off the matter in hand, nor giveth waie to his owne corrupt will (I will not be∣cause I will not) but yeildeth as being overcome in dispute, and granteth the cause to his opponent though he were in age and degree farre inferiour to him∣selfe. From the first of these, namely Iacob'1 Doctrine Not the per∣sons speaking, but the matter spoken, ought chiefly to be mynded. humility, in giving eare and respect t the speech of his son, we may observe thi doctrine viz. That in the church, and amongst the people of God, in discoursing of matters controvertable we are not to respect the persons of them that speake; but the substance and matter of thei speech. If arguments of weight b produced by men in degree and place in∣feriour to others, their speech is not t
be wieghed by their person, place and estimation, but by their wordes; and if their speech be wholsome and seasonable, it ought to be respected, and hearkened to, though their persons be never so much contemned. And on the other hand, though a person, never so eminent for age, riches or otherwise (as Reuben here who was elder than Judah) though his person be never so much in admiration; yet if his wordes be unseasonable, unad∣vised, or wicked, we ought to be so farre from receaving them, that we ought to reprove and reject them. The ApostleIude vers 16. Jude reckoneth in his catalogue of sins this (amongst the rest) to have mens persons in admiration, because of advantage: for our owne ends and purposes, to accept any thing, so it come from him whom we respect; but to finde fault with any thing (though never so cleare) that cometh from him whom we esteem not worthy to speake to us. Thus it was with Ahab he could not endure the person or wordes of Micajah the prophet of the Lord, becaus (though he spake the truth) he1 King. 22: 8 prophesied no good but evill concerning him; whilest he had the false prophets
in admiration, that sewed pillows under his elbowes, perswading him that he should prosper; but they dreamed a false dreame, a lying Spirit was in their mouths. Job was of an other mynd, for though itIob 31: 13. 14. 15. were his man servant or maid servant (which were as much inferiour to him as might be) who had anie cause to contend with him; yet he despised not their plea, but considered that otherwise he should not have answered it whē the Lord should rise and visite it, who made and fashioned both him and them in the wombe. And as for folly and wickednesse, though he be an elder that uttereth it, he must be re∣proved, and that before all, 1 Tim. 5: 20. that the re maie learne to feare; yea if it be an Gal. 1. Ang from heaven that speaketh contrarie to the doctrine which we have receaved of the Lord, he may not be receaved. And good reason too, for as dead Eccl. 10: 1. flies ca the oyntment of the Apothecary to send forth a stinking savour: so doth a little folly him that is in reputation for wisdo∣me, saith Solomon. And Mat. 5: 13. if salt have los it's savour, where with shall it be seasoned it is thence forth good for no thing but t be cast forth and troden under foot o
men; saith our Saviour Christ the true Shelomoh. There is suffitient reason also for the1 Reason. doctrine viz first Becaus otherwise we should be respecters of persons. Nowe the scripture saith of God, that of a truth he is no Act. 10: 38. respecter of persons &c and we are the children of God, and commanded to Eph. 5: 1. follow him as deare children: which we can no waie be said to doe, if we re∣spect Levit. 19: 15. the person of the poore, or honour the person of the mighty in giving judge∣ment either of their wordes or actions. Therfore the Lord commandeth in the law saying, In righteousnes thou shalt judge they neighbour. And the blessed Apostle warneth us not to have Iam. 2: 1: 9. the aith of our Lord Jesus Christ the Lord of glory with respect of persons. Yea, he saith plainly, that if ye have respect of persons, ye commit sin, and are convin∣ced of the law as transgressors. And it was one of the vanities which the preacher saw under the sun, that though wisdome be better than strength, neverthelesse Eccl. 9: 15. 16. the poore man's wisdome was despised, and his words not heard. But Iob 36: 5. God is mighty, and he despiseth not any. Ther∣fore
that godly yong man Iob 32: 21. Elihu desired that he might not accept any man's per∣son, neither give flattering titles unto man. Secondly, becaus slighting the good2 Reason. 1 Thes. 5: 19. thinges which come from some (whose persons are not so much respected) doth greatly quench the gifts of the Spirit. For when a man seeth that (speaking in season and to the purpose) his wordes are respected, it maketh him consider what ought to be done upon an other occasion, and so give his judgement and advise: whereas if it be slighted and di∣sesteemed, at an other time he thinket that if he should speake, it would not be regarded, and therfore resolueth to be silent, and not to utter the advice and counsell which he could give: Where∣by the gifts of the Spirit in such a ma are deaded and as it were restrained; whereas it is noted of our Lord and king Christ Jesus (whose servants we are and whom we ought to imit∣ate) that he breaketh not a bruiseIsa. 42: 3. reed, neither doth quench the smok∣ing flaxe. He depresseth not weake and small beginings but rather i¦creaseth
and cherisheth them. Againe, Otherwise we give occa∣sion3 Reason. of offence to our poore bretheren, against which sin our Saviour pronoun∣ceth a great woe. For though it can not be but offences will come, yetLuc. 17: 1. woe be to him by whom the offence cometh: yea, (saith he) whosoeuer shall offend one of these little ones thatMat. 18: 6. beleeue in me, it were better for him that a milstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were drowned in the depth of the sea. We may see this in common experience, for if a friend give a man good and wholsome advice in necessitie, and it be not regarded but cast at the heeles (as we say) his friend taketh offence and is discontented to see that he hath in love and good will given advice, and it is so little set by. Therfore it were good alwayes to have in mynd the exhortation and example of the blessed Apostle Paul, Give none1 Cor. 10: 32. 33. offence, neither to the Iew nor to the gen∣tiles, nor to the church of God: even as I please all men in all things, not seeking myne owne profit, but the profit of many that they maie be saved.
Furthermore we doe not only slight4 Reason. the person of the man, give him offence, and quench his Spirit; but we also dise∣steem the truth of God offered unto us. For we must know, that what soeuer wholsome and sound argument, conclu∣sion, doctrine, advise, or exhortation, is necessarily and plainly drawne from the scripture, it is the very truth of God; though in other wordes than the scripture expresseth: and whosoeuer despiseth it, despiseth 1 Thes. 4: 8. 1 Cor. 12: 3. Iam. 1: 17. not man but God, by whose Spirit that man (whosoeuer he be) is inabled to speake or offer that unto us. Wherefore our Saviour Christ (to in∣courage his poore disciples whom he knew that the world would not receave) saith▪ Luc. 10: 16. he that heareth you, heareth me; and he that despiseth you, despiseth me: and he that despiseth me despiseth him tha sent me. Lastly, God humbleth himself so lowe▪5 Reason. as to speak to our capacity; the which if he should not doe, how should we eve expect to have the knowledge of his will for God is heavenly, and we not able to stand before his wordes. But he speak∣eth to us in familiar phrases and simili∣tudes,
that we may not be affrighted, but formed and comforted by his heavenly octrine. Why should not we then be illing to receave anie thing for our ood, though the person be meane that ffereth it? will any man refuse gold, ecaus it is offered in a foule paper? will ie man scorn a Jewell of high price, ecaus it is set in a piece of gold of lesse alue? we know it is accompted a sordid ing, to refuse a Jemme or costly stone, ough it be found on a dunghill: So for s to refuse and slight wholsome and good guments and advice, though they come om a man whose person is in disesteeme. now we not that the meaner the oundworke is, the more luster a bright lour maketh? the more shadowing and arke colours are in an effigies or picture out the neck and throat, the more the eautie of the face appeareth? Therfore  is manie times the vanitie of gentle∣omen and Courtiers, to put blackspots n their faces, that so their hard favour aie seeme the more tollerable. Though anie times there be much deceit in such ings in mens workes, and inventions; et certainly it holdeth alwaies true in
God's administrations, that the meaner, weaker, and poorer the person or instru∣ment is, the more is his glory and power seene. For my strength (saith the Lord) is made perfect in 2 Cor. 12: 9. weaknesse: yea G hath chosen the foolish things of the world▪ to confound the wise; and God hath chose the weake thinges of the world, to confoun the thinges that are mightie: and bas1 Cor. 1: 27. 28. 29. 31. thinges of the world, and things which a despised, hath God chosen; yea and thing which are not, to bring to nought thing that are. And wherfore is it, that th Lord chuseth thus to administer? th no flesh should glorie in his presence; b (according as it is written) he that gloriet may glorie in the Lord. Nowe if God b pleased, thus much to honour himself, an extoll the worke of his Spirit by wea instruments; what are we that we shou dare be so wicked as to disesteeme i and not to set forth so much the m his praise? The Pharisees indeed co¦temned Christ, and the testimony  him in the temple, becaus Mat. 21: childr (or men like children) cryed Hosan but they had forgotten the scriptur which saith, Out of the mouth of b
and sucklings thou hast stablished praise.Psal. 8: 2. This point serveth therfore greatly to1 Vse. reprove such as thinke no thing well done or spoken unlesse they doe it them∣elves.Of reproofe. If a poore brother, or weake member speake (though never so seaso∣nably, so soundly) many times they will not respect it, but shew by their ountenaunce or carriage, some light stimation of it: but their owne speeches nd considerations must be regarded  though never so windie or frothy) els hey looke soure, and are not pleased; yea ometimes reply in defence of their owne, whilest an others shalbe disregarded. In earing therfore without partiality, we hould have our eies as it were shut, but ur eares wide open, for words and peeches are not to be receaved by the es, but by the eares. Therfore when ie thing is spoken, we may not so much gard who speaketh (though that in some ases ought to be looked unto, for there  a time and season for all thinges) and if e person please us not, hang downe our eades; but we ought with diligence to tend to what is spoken, and our Iob 34: 3. eares ust try the wordes, even as our mouth
tasteth meat. A man that is invited to a feast, and seeth but one dish of meat brought to the table (as the manner in some Countries is where I have bin) if he should goe away presently becaus that disliketh him; all men will condemne him; for he ought rather to stay, & be perswad∣ed, that if that first please not his palate, yet the second or third may. So if one speech be not so effectually spoken to our apprehension, an other may if we have but patience to hearken to it. And we know that we are bound to try all thinges and to keep that which is good. 1 Joh. 4: 1. 1 Thes. 5: 21. Let us therfore be exhorted hence to2 Vse. Of exhort∣tion. imitate the example of godly Iacob here▪ who contemned not, but hearkened to the arguments of his son: & of Job wh refused not the pleading of his servant. S we not to reject the sound and wholsom wordes and speeches of persons of me place and estimation in the church. And s much the rather becaus it is an ordinanc of God 1 Cor. 14: 31. that all may prophesie, that all m learne and all may be comforted; provide that it be done one by one, decently and iVers 3: 31. 40 order, and also to the edification exhort¦tion
& comfort of the body of Christ, & thatVers 29. not aboue two or three at one assembly. Ne∣bucchadnezar the king may have a poore captive Daniel who may interpret his dreame; yea tell the dreame it selfe▪ when all the magicians or wise men of Babel can not. So also God can reveale that wisdo∣me at one time to a simple and weake Christian, or to a poore man, in some thing, that many wise men maie not at the present thinke on. Therefore let us cherrish and stirre up the gifts of God's Spirit in one another, and judge righte∣ous judgment: and therein we shall reap not only profit, but also great comfort. For God is bound to noe man in the dis∣pensation of his gifts; Not alwayes great chollers (according to the world's estima∣ion) are of the soundest judgements, and ive the best advice: but God giveth freely is grace and holy Spirit to whom he ple∣seth. Yea let us be so farre from contem∣ing good counsell advice or arguments oming from men of meane quality; as that e magnifie and praise the name of God ho doth so mightily declare his power y such weake & impotent meanes. Wee ave the example of Christ Math. 11▪ 25. Iesus our lord
and master for it, and if we are not herein imitators of him, we prove our selves de∣generate sons of God. From Jacob's readinesse and willing∣nesse to learne and be taught; yea to lay downe and renounce his former resolu∣tions, upon hearing stronger arguments which convinced him; we are also taught two severall lessons or doctines more; tending much to one effect. Namely first: That men ought never to be so re∣solute2 Doctrine. Not to be resolute in unadvised purposes. in performance of that which they unadvisedly purpose; but that they ought to be diswaded therefrom upon good grounds and arguments. The contrary to this is a manifest token  of stubborne wilfulnesse; when a man will doe a thing, becaus he hath resolved it, though it cost him a fall. And some we may take notice of (if we consider with our selves what we heare and see daylie) which are met with all in such their audatious & peremptorie carriages: and they repent many times for that which they have done, when it is too late, when they have first come off with weeping crosse. Whereas men should rather weigh, and consider what they
purpose, and see by their owne examina∣tion, and others also (if they can obtaine it) whither their purpose tendeth to Gods glory, their owne safety, & good of others: or whither (on the other hand) it tend∣eth not to God's great dishonour, and their owne damage; which one man can not so easily judge, as two or more can, seing that in Pro. 11: 14 the multitude of counsellors there is safety. As in Pro. 24: 6. warre, so in other occasions, if men use counsell, they shall prosper the better, and come off wth les∣e damage. Besides men are apt to be well perswaded of their owne purposes; nd therefore it is altogether dangerous, hat men should be so resolute in the per∣ormance of their unadvised purposes, as hat they will not (by right or reason) be tayed from doeing them. For it is bet∣er of the two, that a wicked or unad∣ised purpose should be broken than per∣ormed: though men are not hence to ake liberty (but to be sparing) in mak∣ng hastie vowes and resolutions in diffi∣ult cases, and matters wherein the issue ay fall otherwise than we are aware of, nd there may appeare great necessity of ltering such purposes. Remember Jeph∣thah's
rash vowe, which he made unto theIug. 11: 31. 35. Lord & how it befell him. He did it in ze∣ale against his & God's enemyes, but God required no such thing at his hand. Had he promised as Iacob did, Gen. 28: 21. 22. that the Lord should be his God, & of all his substāce he would give him the tenth; he had promised that which he might lawfully performe, and it had bin advisedly: But promising, that whatsoe∣ver should come out of his house to meet him should be offered unto the Lord, be spake unadvisedly with his lips, and pro∣mised he knew not what; yet if he had con∣sidered well of the matter before, he might easily have conceaved, that his daughter might as well meet him as any thing els; or els a dogge which had bin unfit for the Lord. Therfore the Apostle Paul speaketh of zeale that is not according to knowledge,b Philip. 3: 6. Rom. 10: 2. such as a verie persecutor may have. So if Iacob here, should have bin so resolute in not letting Benjamine goe, as that be would not have bin perswaded; he and his family might all have perished, & he haveNote. bin secondarily a great cause of it. I call them herein unadvised resolutions, becaus I intend not by this discourse any wise to ¦mitigate or abate those manly & absolute
resolutions which should be in God's ser∣vice: But that men having maturely consi∣dered that the Lord commandeth this or that duty to be done, in this or that manner therein a man ought to set up a couragious resolution to doe it without let; no man should binder us from yeilding obedience to the law of our God. In such cases in our obedience we should be like unto David who saith of him self Psal. 119. I made hast & de∣layed not to keep they commandements: & in our resolutions like unto Joshuah unto the elders of Israel saying Iosh. 24: 15 chuse ye whom ye will serve, &c. but as for me and my house we will serve the Lord. Such resolutions as these, God doth lovingly accept, and they are evident signes of a willing mynd when we are so resolute; also of love to the service of God when no thing shall stay us there from, either in our selves or others; and also of delight in the service of God, when we doe so adventure our selves therein. And in such resolutions we need not to feare, wee have the word of God, his law for our warrant and he will bear us out in it. As lawyers will say to their Clyents; I understand the matter well, you have the law on your side, goe foorth
in your suite; I'le warrrant you the case: So may we say one to an other in godly resolutions; yea this the word of God doth in effect tell us. But when we have a difficult matter in hand, when we are led either by affection, or our owne hu∣mane perswasion (which often faileth, and hath no infallible rule to walke by) there 't is good to make use of this caution, which the a fore said doctrine and exam∣ple of Jacob doe suggest to us. The other note which hence may be observed is this, namely; That men Doctrine. Tryall of our judgments by others. ought never to have such a self conceit of their particuler judgments and opinions in matters controvertable; but that they are to be willing to have them tryed by the arguments of others grounded upon the word of God; yea, and being con∣vinced, to renounce the same. Solomon therfore giveth a good admonition, say∣ing, Prov. 3: 7. Be not wise in thine owne eyes, feare▪ the Lord and depart from evill. And in an other place, Be not righteous over much,Eccl. 7: 16. neither make thy self over wise: why should∣est thou destroy thy selfe? It dependeth also on good ground, or reason: for first,1 Reason. Tryal of our judgments and opinions with
others, is a meanes whereby we come to ee the worth of our judgement: and if it e good are confirmed & strengthened in ; if evill we may have our Judgments nd understanding informed and reform∣d, if we thinke not too well of our selves. or as the vapours, fogs, and mists vanish way with the appearing brightnesse and eate of the sun: So shall we, and all that ave discerning Spirits see falshood to anish when truth with her illustrious ightshining countenance and goodly yes cometh in place. Men may be eceaved of persons (whose voice they e not well know) in the darke (as Isaac as of his owne son Jacob) but when they e come to the light they are knowen,  we have but eyes to see them. The ght maketh all things manifest: So hatsoeuer we hold, or affirme, when it meth to the light of God's word, and en examination, and canvassing (as we ) of others; then it shalbe manifest th to our selves and others, of what orth it is; but so long as we keep it to rselves, and have too great an opinion  our owne conceit, we know it not. ee keep many time an enemy in our
bosome unawares. The word is as the touchstone to the gold, & men of gifts an as the gold smithes. A man that hath b little skill, if it glister, & hath a good co∣lour (as he thinketh) he is well perswade of it, but bring it to a gold smith, and l him try it on the touchstone; and then yo shall know what mettal it is: So ma men are well perswaded of their fooli opinions; if they have a little naturall rea¦son on their side, if it carry but a faire sh with it, & seemeth some times contenti to the flesh, and agreable to their humo hoe! it is excellent, I can see no reason ag¦inst it, will a man say, but when it com to the eye of a juditious man to trye it  the word of God, it presently appeare what it is; And it may be he heareth t gold smith say to him, Sir your gold copper or some baser mettal. Wee sho be therfore in this point like unto a simp child, who knoweth not what belonge to pearles & pretious stones, save only t he hath heard people speake much of th & goeing by the sea side where usually  to be found stones of rare and sumptuo colours, & seing one more curious than t rest (as he thinks) taketh it up & esteeme
t highly, till he cometh home to his father o whom he saith, See, I pray father, what  have found! a brave pretious stone; is it ot? No child, saith the father; this is a pib∣le stone, such as lye by the sea side; but retious stones they are brought from the dies, & are found in strange fishes hea∣es, & other rare places: presently so soone s the child heareth this, away goeth his ibble stone: So we should doe with our ght and vaine opinions and resolutions hich we through ignorance sudainly take p many times. To which purpose Solo∣onProv. 14: 15. speaketh wisely, saying, The simple be∣eveth every word: but the prudent man look∣h well to his goeing. And elsewere he saith, e way of a foole is right in his owne eies: but  that hearkeneth unto counsell is wise. Againe, the contrary hereunto argueth2 Reason. eat pride and self conceit of our owne isdome and understanding, that we will t submit it to the tryall & understandingProv. 3: 7. Pro. 26: 12.  others by the word of God. And Solo∣on saith plainly, Seest thou a mā wise in his ne conceit: there is more hope of a foole than  him. It is also a great undervalueing and se estimation of the wisdome of God  others as if God were bound only to
give us wisdome, and doth not ma others partakers of as great and greater measure of grace and gifts of his holy Spirit many times than he doth us. Ther∣fore we are exhorted by the Apostle to doe nothing through strife or vaine glorie, Philip. 2: 3. in lowlines of mynd let each esteem other bet∣ter than themselves; and also not Rom. 12: 16. to my high things but condiscend to men of l degree: neither to be wife in our own conceits. Yea the rule of charity lead¦eth us to thinke an other better than ou selves, at least till we have made som good tryall of him. Yet so as that we a1 Cor. 1. not to submit our selves absolutlie t what others shall thinke or understand▪ and so to fall into that errour to beleivA caveat. as the Church beleeveth, becaus I am t thinke the Church wiser (that consistet of manie) than myself who am but on or to pin my faith on other mens sleeves but every man is to see by his owne eye to be guided by his owne sence, to be s¦ved by his owne (not anothers) faith; an therfore to be well perswaded in his ow conscience of whatsoever he doth; sRom. 14: 23. whatsoever is not of faith is sin. Other reasons might be added, but
what purpose? a word to the wise is suf∣ient, espetially seing there lyeth no ubt or difficulty in either of the doctri∣es that they should need any further in geing of, or dwelling upon them by guments. Only it remaineth, that some e or application be made of them. First1 Vse. Reproofe. erfore, such come here justly to be re∣oved as are too hastie in making of wes, protestations, and resolutions in fficult or doubtfull cases, to doe this or at; not considering the inconveniences hich the thing maie bring with it; or the cessity there may be of staying the per∣mance; but are wilfull, witlesse, and elesse in their resolutions. And such o as having rashly purposed, though ey see (by the information and argu∣ents of others) great inconvenience and nger to come by it; yet they will not beare, they have begun it, & now they ll goe forth; they have purposed, and y should they goe back from their rd? That they thinke to be a kind of wardise, and faint heartednesse; which ey would willingly be free from. But  Apostle Iames teacheth ChristianIam. 4: 13. 14. n, to be otherwise affected, not to be
so resolute in their purposes in doubtf matters, seing they know not what a nig may bring forth, and what shalbe on the m¦row. Whence men are learned, and warne to be sparing, and cautious in purposing & resolving absolutely in ambiguous mat∣ters; or els at least, if they have rashly pur∣posed, & come to see the danger of it, l them take heed how they goe on in the sa∣me, least they increase their transgressio And for the second point, it serveth t2 Vse. reprove, and refute, the reverend and con∣ceited opinion which some men have o their owne judgments & understandings▪ They thinke becaus they hold this or th to be true, men must receave it (or els the are enemies to truth) when as they ha many times no more than their bare wo (or say so) to shew for it, and little she of reason, but lesse of the word of Go They are farre from that doctors resol¦tion,I. II. who sayd, I will not say within  self, I will hold it therfore it shalbe trut but this is truth therfore I will hold it:  will not strive for victory, but for trutBut he vvas farre himself from doeing according to his resolution. His desire seemed to be, to try out th truth first, & then to place his affection  mynd thereupon (which is according▪
the Apostle's advice, try all things, & hold  that which is good) but these men th whom we have to deale, although we ll see how stiffe they wilbe in holding ir opinions, as if they would loose their es before they will part with them: yet y will not (nor care not to) come to all of them. They had rather sleep in a ole skin (as we use to say) in their er∣r, than be shaken out of their senselesse epe. And if they be by much a doe ught to manage their opinion, though ey be never so plainly convinced; yet ey will rest them selves contented with ir owne darling, though they have no ng els at length to say, but it is my jud∣ment, & I can not see otherwise. This is ange reasoning (beloved) strange mani∣ation of the hope that is in us. And I ld wish that we were all sound from s disease of self conceit of our owne gments. And if we have bin any of us lty heretofore, either in being unwiling have our opinions come to tryall by the rd of God, or being tryed & suffitiently vinced, have bin hardly drawen to  them downe: let us labour hence∣th to amend this fault, let us receave no
thing into our opinion or fancie, but th which we have good persuasion of; a that grounded upon the word of God and be not so wedded to our owne imag¦nations (as if we were the only men, a wisdome must dye with us) but that up good cause we will renounce them, a be willing to learn & be taught of othe and thinke it no disgrace to us that oth men seeme in some things wiser than o selves: but let us become fooles that we m1 Cor. 3: 18. be wise. Iacob thought it no disparag¦ment to him to be advised by his sons; y indeed it is a point of singuler wisdome  receave information, whereas he th despiseth instruction is a foole. We may further behold in this ass of Iacob, an example or patterne of sim¦licity. He is said in the begining of  storie of him, to be a plaine man; and I Gen. 25: 27. sure that here in this place he plainly p¦veth himself so, not in person but in co¦dition; for he dealeth simply and plain in that being convinced of his opinio and vanity of his purpose, and having  suffitient arguments and perswasive r¦sons layd before him; he doth not se starting holes, vaine sophismes,
vasions, to turne away the matter, or anie ise to defend or excuse himselfe for his ormer resolutions; but plainly yeildeth o the naked truth, and that with wil∣ngnesse. Whereby may be seen the folly f some wo call themselves sons of Iacob, ut are wholy degenerate from him in is good practice; for though at length ey doe (their mouthes being stopped y the power of strong arguments) lay owne their corrupt opinions, yet it is ven as a cat doth the mouse that she hath ken, and a dog his bone, with a great ale of grumbling and howling; it is (in sort) wrested from them, and they will ot yeild so long as they can have any tch or vagarie though it be but to little rpose. Such striving and needlesse ntention men will many times make, fore they will deny them selves; and  for love of their reputation before en, they would not be said to be over∣me if they could helpe it. I can not re fitly compare them (for the present) an to Sampson, who before he would e his Dalila, he would lose his haire, d so his great strength: So these will nd themselves out of all, both strength,
honesty, and godlines to maintaine their beloved errour, till at length they can hold it no longer; their very opinion bringeth them to shame and reproach, as she did Sampson into the hands of the Philistins who made a mock of him. In the second place, we have here inIacob's coun∣saile to his sons. the text considerable, the wise and grave advise which Jacob giveth to his sons fo the better succeeding of their journey & what they were about to take in hand▪ and that his son Benjamine and the otheVers 11. To take. son which was already in hold, might b returned in safety to him. And this coun∣saile of his is twofold. First, to take wit1. A present. them a present of the best things of th land of Canaan, to give unto Ioseph. Gift and presents are given to princes, or gre personages, usually, either to mitigate o reconcile their affections; or to procu favour from them. For gifts and presen are a testification of a good opinion, a respect that a man hath of the person  whom he presenteth them, or of homag and reverence which he oweth unto hi Therfore we shall find that in some cou¦tries it is a custome that the tenants b coppy hold doe (at a certaine season
e yeare) present their Landlord with ifts and presents in token of homage hich they confesse to owe to him. And n the other hand, they who receave gifts d presents from others, doe (in a sort) lige themselves to recompence them, d therfore we say when we receave a membrance from a freind, I shall doe y best to make you a requitall for this ndnesse; or at least men in such cases ew some tokens of acceptation, and that ey are well pleased with the parties▪  this same godly patriarch; fearing the ge of his brother Esau, sent a present be∣re him that he Gen. 33: 8. might finde grace in his ht. And Solomon saith, that a Pro. 18: 16. mans t maketh roome for him, and bringeth m before great men. And in an other ace, Pro. 21: 18. A gift in secret pacifieth anger, d a reward in the besome strong wrath. If any here object and say, But God by  s law forbiddeth the taking of gifts, and  consequently the giving of them,  eut. 16: 19. & 27: 25. it may be there∣to easily answered, that it is not the gi∣ng or taking a gift that is by the law ndemned, but the end of giving or tak∣g of it; which is to give a gift to have
Judgement corrupted; to receave a gift to pervert or wrest a matter in the judgment of it; that is, for the gift or reward to doe contrary to law & equity; which the pla∣ces cited doe plainly shew. But it doth no waie condemne gifts & presents which in∣feriours give to their superiours, or supe∣riours to their inferiours, or one friend to an other, in token of homage, honour, or friendship: for this is a part of that love & mutuall friendship which we are to obser∣ve either to other, for the upholding of mutuall affection & society among us; & very usefull & profitable it is, for that pur∣pose among men. So Jacob doth here send a present to Joseph, not to have him wrest judgment or pervert justice for his sake; but to testifie his observance and respect towards him, & also his thankfulnesse for his former good will & favour towards his sons. Besides Iacob doth this not without the singuler motion of God's spirit, & his providence (as was noted before in open∣ing the generall scope of the chapter) for so he unwittingly fulfilleth the dreame of Ioseph in bowing downe to him in this his present, wherein he acknowledgeth reve∣rence and honour to him, as well as if he
had in person done obeysance. These considerations therfore being had of this matter, it will appeare hence plainly to be lawfull for men to send presents either to other in this sort as Jacob doth; so as it be done, not out of a false, or faigned, but true and sincere respect and affection. The other part of his counsell is, to2 Double monyes. Vers 12. ake double monies in their handes; least there had bin an oversight. This may be understood either with relation to the sons of Iacob, or the servants of Ioseph who should have kept or looked to the monie. If to the former, then it shew∣eth Jacob's great feare of his son's trespas∣sing. He had seene (by woefull expe∣ience) their evill inclynations, when they were at home with him, as it were nder his nose (as the histories of Reuben, Simeon and Levi, yea and Iudah also be∣ore declare) no marvaile then, if he hould feare that they might have mi∣taken when they were so farre from him n Egipt. And this serveth for parents, o teach them a godly feare of their chil∣dren, that having seen them in times ast inclynable to this or that vice or vill, they be for the future time the more
fearfull of their committing sin. The like godly feare and care we see in Iob that patterne of patience, who fearing least his sons should in their feasting and mer∣ryment have sinned and cursed God in their hearts, he sent and sanctifyed them when the dayes of their feasting were gone about, and offered burnt offerings accotding to the nomber of them. Job. 1: 5. If we referre it to the latter, then it sheweth, first, Iacob's honestie and righ∣teousnesse towards men, that he would not detaine from an other that which might be due to him. And indeed it is the counsell of Solomon, not to withholdProv. 3: 27. good from them to whom it is due, when it is in the power of thine hand to doe it. Secondly, that he was not covetous, or desirous in his heart to enrich himself by the losse or discommodity of another, but was contented with that portion of sub∣stance which God had given him. I either, and both is shewed his wisdome▪ & prudence, whereby he seeketh to avoy all occasions of offence, or appearanc of evill; and to prevent all trouble tha might in anie wise befall his sons in Egypt▪ whereby his family might be hinde∣red
of supplie of corne, and his sons (espetially Benjamine) be kept from him. Out of all which wee might reap manie profitable instructions to our selves: But my desire is to speake some whatIacob's prayer Vers 14. from the next particuler. Wherfore I omit many things which might hence be deduced; and proceed to the third and last particuler of Iacob's speech, and that is, his prayer for their good successe and prosperity. Wherein we may observe,  first, to whom he prayeth? to God, mag∣nified and set forth by one of his divine attributes, namely, Almighty. Secondly  for what he prayeth? to wit, to give them mercie in the sight of the man, (that is Ioseph) that he might send away their brother and Benjamine. Thirdly, Iacob's  godly resolution, manifested in his pa∣tient resting upon the will and pleasure of God; and his fatherly dispositio saying, If I am bereaved of both my children, I am bereaved. Of all which briefly in their order. From the first of these, in that Iacob1 To vvhom he prayeth? to God. (being now sending away his sons, after he had given them good advice and di∣rection concerning their journie) doth
pray to God for them; we learne, That4 Doctrine. No advise prosperous vvithout God: bles∣sing. no consultations, directions, or advise which we give unto others, or receave from others (though in them selves never so wise and excellent) can doe good; or stand us in any stead: unlesse we have the Lord's blessing, and good hand with us, to assist & prosper us in the same. And this is to be obtained only by earnest prayer, as hath bin often (upon sundry occasions) shewed, and is daylie taught us out of the psalmes of David. Therfore it shal∣be  well for us that we hence receave in∣struction and exhortation, both in giving and taking counsaile and advise, to seeke unto the Lord for his blessing, and then we shall prosper. Commit thy workesProv. 16: 3. unto the Lord, and thy thoughts shalbe esta∣blished. Whereas otherwise all the coun∣sels of the wise and prudent are soone brought to nought, for it is written, Iob 5: 12. 13. he taketh the wise in their owne Craftinesse; and he disappointeth the devises of the craftie, so that their handes cannot performe their enterprise. If therfore we desire to have the meanes which we use benefitiall & profi∣table to us; we must seeke of God to blesse the same, and give us good speed.
Furthermore in that Iacob saith, GodGod Almigh∣tie. Almighty, that, is God All suffitient.* Heb▪ El shadai. Fortis omni∣potens. n hebrew are two forceable words used Ael shaddai, which may be rendered the strong one who hath all suffitiencie, or most abundant in power; that is, hath all power to doe whatsoever he pleaseth, either in heaven or earth, yea in the very hearts and inward affections of men (though never so great and powerfull n this wordly dignitie) we are further aught; that when we come unto God5 Doctrine. God must be rested in as able to doe vvhatsoeuer vve ask. with any petition or supplication, we must be certainly perswaded in our hearts, hat he is able to helpe us in that very hing which we desire, or in any thing ls whereof we stand in need: and in such assurance or confidence to offer up ur prayers to his majestie, or els we oose our labour; it is all in vaine. The Apostle willeth therfore that men e every where, (but it must be)1 Tim. 2: 8. ithout wrath, or doubting. In prayer o God, there is no place for doubting r wavering, for he that wavereth isIam. 1. ke a wave of the sea, and without faith  is impossible to please God: for he at cometh to God, must beleeue that
God is, and that the is a rewarder of themHeb. 11: 6. that diligently seeke him. Againe in that he prayeth here to God,2 For vvhat? to Shevv you mercy in the sight of the man. to shew them mercie in the sight of the man; that is, to bend the mynd and affections of the man (Ioseph) so farre to favour them, as to send both Simeon and Benjamine away to him againe; we may also learne; That there is no favour to6 Doctrine. It is God that giveth us fa∣vour before men. be had from earthly princes, or men of great place and authority in the world, or from any whatsoeuer, but God is the effitient author of it. It is he that pro∣cureth it us, and giveth us favour in their sight and presence. It was he that gave his Exod. 3: 21. And 11: 3. people Israel favour in the sight of the Egyptians, that they went not away emptie out of their land. It wa by fasting and prayer to God, tha Hest. 4: 16. VVith 5: 2. Hester procured favour in the sight o Ahasuerus the king, when she we (by her uncle Mordecay's advise)  crave the lives of her people (the Jewes▪ being all decreed to be slaine by the crue devise of wicked Haman. So it is sai of Ioseph, that the Lord gave him Act. 7: 10. f¦vour and wisdome in the sight of Phara King of Egypt, and he made him governo
over Egypt, and all his house. And of Da∣niel it is also spoken, that Dan. 1: 9. God had brought him into favour and tender love with the prince of the Eunuches. Solomon ther∣foreProv. 29: 26. saith, Many seeke the rulers favour: but every mans judgement cometh from the Lord. The reason of this is, becaus it is God  that otdereth and over ruleth the hearts of men, and either moveth them to good; or els depriveth them of his grace, and so their harts are of themselves inclyned to doe evil: as it is said of him, that he urned the Egyptians hearts to hate hisPsal. 105: 25. people, to deale subtilly with his servants. Yea the very hearts of Kings are in the ands of the Lord: as the rivers of waterProv. 21: 1. e turneth them whithersoeuer he will. And although they be otherwise wicked nd ungodly men; yet he over ruleth their ffections many times so as they shew avour to his people: as may be seene  that memorable example of Iehosha∣hat2 Cron. 1: 31. king of Iudah, being invironed by he captaines of the charriots of the king of Syria (who thought him to be the ing of Israel against whom their master ad commanded them to fight) he cryed
out and the Lord helped him, and moved them to depart from him. The which serveth to admonish us,1 Vse. that if we have favour and respect in the eies of princes and magistrates of the world, great men that are in authoritie; let us take heed how we doe ascribe it to our owne good carriage, or worthinesse: but let us render the glory and praise of it unto God, and be thankfull to him con∣tinually. And this maie in a good measure concerne us who have favour in the eies not only of the people, but also of the princes & magistrates of this land & citie where we sojourne; by wose meanes under God we enioy this glorious & comforta∣ble liberty of the gospell, which in our owne native conntrie we can not enioy. If we consider our carriage and conversa∣tions rightly what they have bin, we (abo∣ve others) maie conclude, that (by our con∣tentions and abuse of our liberty) we have justly deserved to be hated and despised; yea to be driven out from having anie receptacle, or abideing place amongst them: and therfore we can not but (the more plainlie) see, that it is even the meere mercie of our most gratious and
compassionate father, who hath given us his favour. Wherfore, not unto us ohPsal. 115: 1. Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name be all he praise. Secondly, we are hence learned;2 Vse. n case we stand in need at any time of he favour and helpe of earthly princes, & reat men, (either for our selves, or our retheren in the faith) whither to apply, r be take our selves; even to the Lord ho giveth us all things freely to enioy. ollowe the example of queene Ester,Est. 4: 16. ast and pray, lift up strong cryes unto God with that faithfull servant of the ord Nehemiah, who said, Lord I beseechNehem. 1: 11 ee, let now thine eare be attentive to the rayer of thy servant, and to the prayer of y servants who desire to feare thy name: nd prosper (I pray thee) thy servant this ay, and grant him mercy in the sight of this an. Lastly, seing it is God that sheweth3 Vse. s mercie and favour in the sight of men: hen maie we here behold what an excel∣ent thing it is to be in the favour & love f God. They that are so, shall obtaine fa∣our with men also, when and as often as ey stand in need of it. Wherfore above ll thinges let us seek for the good will & vour of Almightie God; and having it
let us also take heed of losing it: and then we need not doubt the having of the fa∣vour of men, so farre forth as he seeth good for us, for all thinges worke togetherRom. 8. for good to them that love God. And if God be with us, we need not feare anie that are against us: for he is able to make our verie enemies to be at peace with us; yea (as Eliphaz saith) we shalbe at leagueIob 5: 23. with the stones of the feild, and the beasts of the field shalbe at peace with us. And here they come justly to be taxed of er∣rour that doe so much labour for the fa∣vour of great men (ho! the favour of the King, or prince, what greater honour can they be in?) but in the meane time they seeke not the favour of God. We maie see the vanity of such men in Ha∣man, who was so proud of his glory and favour with the King, and that he alone should be accepted of with the King to the banquet which Queene Ester had▪ prepared, as was wonderfull to see: but howe soone he was brought lowe, and poore Mordecai (who was in the fa∣vour of God) exalted, the historie at large declareth. By which we may see, that it is the Psa. 113: 7. 8. Lord that raiseth the poore
out of the dust, and lifteth the needy out f the dunghill; that he may set him with rinces, even with the princes of his eople: and that promotion comethPsa. 75: 6. 7. either from the east, nor from the west, or from the south; but God is the judge, e putteth downe one, and setteth up other; as saith the Psalmist. Wher∣ore that kingly prophet singeth sweetly, aying, There be manie that say, whoPsal. 4: 6. 7. ill shew us anie good? Lord lift thou p the light of they countenance upon s. In the verie remembrance where∣f, he lifteth up his sweet note, being s it were ravished in his spirit, saying, hou hast put gladnes in myne heart, more han in the time that their corne and their ine and their oyle increased. And so I passe to the last particuler inIacob's good resolution to rest in the vvill of God. acob's prayer, (or speech) to wit, his odly resolution; that having given grave nd wholsome advice and counsell to his ons for their good successe, and prayed to od for his blessing thereunto; now he eteth downe his resolution to rest in the ood hand of God▪ howsoeuer he should ispose, though he should be bereaved not nly of his other son, but of Benjamine so.
I shall forbe are to meddle with the difficulty of the Vaeni chaesher shachole∣thi sha∣chalethi. hebrew text in these wordes of Iacob (it being beyond my skill learnedly to discourse of the hebrew construction, and I find that learned men are at some variance therein) and make choice of our last and most approved translation (as being in my opinion most agreable to the scope of this scripture to which I find many (whose learning IAynsvv in lcum. Belg. transt. cannot but well approve of) agree which rendereth the words thus, If I be bereaved of my children, I am bereaved; where, of my children, is supplyed for the plainer understanding of the text. In which speech of Iacob (thus rendered) wee maie behold the victory which true faith and firme confidence in the Lord getteth over naturall affections. Iacob in all this dispute, and in his for∣mer resolution, manifested an entire an indeared affection towards his childeren, espetially Benjamine: hut now necessity constraining, and he perceaving that i was the will of God (without whose pro∣vidence no thing befalleth his elect) tha he should part with his sonne; he submit∣teth his naturall affection to the will an
worke of God. The wordes themsel∣ves, If I am bereaved, I am bereaved, thus vehementlie spoken, doe shew the great griefe and sorrow that Iacob was in to part with his sons, and the earnest af∣fection wherewith he prayeth for their restoration; together also with his man∣like resolution to rest in God's pleasure. Whence on the one hand may be noted what naturall affection there should be between parents and children: that the child should be deare to the parents, no thing more deare in this life than it, for it is (as it were) a branch of them the tree; it is part of them; flesh of their flesh, and bone of their bone. There is such a neare relation that God doth in scripture make use of it to represent and ay before us the love which he beareth towards his elect. Therefore when we see at any time parents carelesse and negligent of their children, we may plain∣ly conclude that they are unnaturall, and degenerate from this naturall affection which was in Iacob. Ad on the other hand, how greatly it standeth children in hand, to honour and reverence such pa∣rents, as doe so dearly affect them. Againe,
parents are by this example of Iacob taught that in all things which happen to their children (whē they have done their best, & praied to God for his blessing) they must rest in the disposing hand of God. Though the Lord be pleased to bereave them of aIob 1: 21. child, yea two, nay, all their children (as he did Job) yet they are to be patiēt, & rest in the good hand & providence of God. Not to be so discontented at the losse of chil∣dren as if we loved them more than God, who gave us those and can give more. In∣deed the carriage of that man after God's owne heart (David) were good for parents2 Sam▪ 12: 20 to imitate in matters of this nature. If God doe visite their children with sicknesse or trouble, then they should goe to God in prayer, and earnest crying (yea with fa∣sting too if need require) that (if he see it for his glory, and it be agreable to his di∣vine will and pleasure) he would be plea∣sed to spare them: but when they see what the good pleasure of the Lord is, and that they are deprived of them; then to arise and anoint themselves, and eat bread▪ thereby shewing their willing submissio to the will of God. For otherwise i shewing our selves fondly and foolishly
affected to our children, we shall shew our selves disobedient to our heavenly father, as too many parents doe (yea such sometimes as make a shew of religion & he feare of God) who whilest their child s sick greatly bestirre themselves in seek∣ng to physitians and Doctors, for all the elpe and counsell that may be, and in he meane time are wholy negligent, or (at east) verie remisse & sparing in humbling hemselves by fasting and prayer for their wne sins which (may be) are one cause of he child's sicknesse: but when it is dead, hen they cry, howle, & wring their han∣es, as if by their teares they could re∣eem it againe; when as it is too late: that ould have come more seasonably before 's departure, so it had bin in a godly sort.  Lastly, to all in generall of what con∣ition or sexe soever (parents, or children, d or yong, male or female) this exam∣e of Iacob affordeth us further, this sson; That we are so to commit our7 Doctrine▪ God's people must rest vvith pa∣tience in God's good pleasure. lves and our actions into the handes of lmightie God by faith, that if the ent and issue fall out otherwise (in tem∣rall affaires) than we desire or expect; t we are patiently to beare it, and rest
in the Lordes administration. This was the good resolution of Queen Ester, when she had committed herselfe and her cause to God by prayer and fasting, then (saith she) will I goe in unto the King,Est. 4: 16. which is not according to the lawe; and if I perrish, I perrish. Such also was Da∣vid's consideration, in his flight from Ab∣solon,2 Sam. 15: 25. 26. when he sent back the arke of God, saying unto Zadok; Carry back the ark of God into the citie: if I shall find favour in the eies of the Lord, he will bring me againe, and shew me both it, and his habitation. But if he thus say, I have no delight in thee: be∣hold, here am I, let him doe to me as seemet good unto him. Yea old Eli himself wh had transgressed in flattering his sonnes▪ and not restrayning them from their abo∣minations (though he seemed to reprov them) when Samuel told him the pu¦pose of God against him and his house; h submitted himselfe, saying, It is the Lor1 Sam. 3: 18. let him doe what seemeth him good. An1 Reason. the reason of this is, first becaus we do not know what is good for our safety an most profit. Therfore in submitting o selves herein, we acknowledge, his divi wisdome and providence: whereas othe¦wise
we may be justly censured, for such as thinke our selves wiser than God, when we doe not like, or rest in, his disposing. Secondly, our obedience and love to God2 Reason. is hereby tryed; to see whither we love our outward safety & good (as we thinke) or to have our content in the thing we de∣sire; more than to submit to his divine will and pleasure. This point therfore (that I may draw1 Ʋse. Of reproofe. o an end) condemneth the discontent, mpatience, and waspishnesse of many, who if they have not that which they would have, are so displeased, that they grieve and afflict themselves. They consi∣der not, that though they have not just the hing which they desire, yet God is able o helpe them some other waie. They all not to mynd, that (it may be) God noweth and fore seeth in his divine wis∣ome, that thing not to be profitable for hem; or that it is not for his own glorie, hich we ought principally to respect in ll our desires. Now there is none know∣th what is for the glory of his name so ell as himselfe; therefore in such thinges s wherein we have not an infallible revel∣ation what may be most for his glory we
must (in imitation of our blessed Saviour) submit our desires to him, saying, Mat. 26: 39 Never the lesse, not as I will, but as thou wilt. Take hoed we be not like Ion. 4: 1. 6, 8. 9. 10. Ionah the prophet, who was angrie and disconten∣ted for the goard (which was but of one night's growth) becaus he was therby comforted, and delivered from his griefe, it being a shadow over his head, for the which also he had taken no paines or la∣bour: and yet in the meane time rested not well pleased in the sparing of Nineveh that great citie, becaus he mynded more his particuler credit and commoditie, than he did the glory of God. This serveth further to exhort us (by2 Vse. Exortation. all meanes) to take heed how we murmure against God: but let us in all our affaires submit our selves with patience to such effect or issue as the Lord shall please to give to our enterprises; having first made use of lawfull meanes, and sought to him for his blessing. If it come according to our desire, we see our praiers answered; and let us be thankfull. If not, let us be contented: and know that God is ou gratious father, and such a one as is full o pitie and tender compassion: and as th
mother forgetteth not the child of her wombe, so the Lord forgetteth not those that feare him; but in all their troubles, he is troubled, and hath care of them, that not so much as a haire falleth from their heades without his providence. In every 1 Cor. 10: 13. temp∣tation he will give us a happie issue, such as shalbe more for his glory, and our good. Cast (therfore) thy Psa. 55: 22. burthen upon the Lord, and he shall sustaine thee: he shall never suffer the righteous to be moved. Hum∣ble 1 Pet. 5: 6. 7. your selves under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you, in due time, casting all your care upon him for he careth for you. THE END.
A TREATISE Of Christ's Kingdome in An excercitation on the first chapter of the gospell of Jesus Christ according to Luke performed on the Lord's day 22o Sep∣tembris 1641. Luc. Cap. 1. WE are come now (by the espe∣tiall providence and favour of God) to the third testimonie of the gospell of Iesus Christ; which is written by Luke, a faithfull witnes, whose praise is in the gospell, as may be seen in this very worke; whoArgument of the gospell. doth in this historie by the spetiall helpe & motion of the Spirit of God (by whom he and the rest of the 2 Pet. 1: 21. holy men of God that penned the scripture were directed) make relation (as he himsels testifyeth, Acts. 1: 1. 2.) Of all that Iesus began both
to doe and teach untill the day in which he was taken up, after that he through the holy Ghost, had given commandement to the Apostles whom he had chosen. And al∣beit he directeth this treatise to a parti∣culer person: yet we may not therfore conclude, either that it is not by us to be receaved as written Rom. 15: 4. for our learning, or that it is of lesse authority than the other Euangelists histories, which are not so directed, or than the epistles of the Apostle Paul, which are dedicated either o some church (as of Rome Colosse, &c.) r to some particuler person, as Timothy, hilemon, &c. For the argument of his historie, it is a thing needlesse to nsist upon, it being before expressed in hat cited place Acts. 1. Yea and also com∣rised in the title of this booke it selfe, o wit, The gospell of Iesus Christ. It halbe good therfore (having respect to he small time allotted) to proceed to he substance of the scripture in hand. herein the Euangelist (to the end that e may proceed in order and the more lainlie) offereth unto us the understand∣ng of things from the verie first, accord∣ng to the contents of his preface.
Before he cometh to speake of theContens of the chapter. birth of Christ, he doth particulerly re∣late some spetiall thinges of note and im∣portance which were as occurences or pre∣parations to the same, and administred (by the determinate counsell and fore know∣lege of God, and according to the promi∣ses which he had before declared by his servants the prophets) in, upon, and to∣wards the instruments of Christ's nativity, and manifestation unto the world: which is the somme and substance of this chapter now read. Wherein we may observe these generall parts. First, the preface  unto the whole historie in the foure first verses. Secondly, the message sent from  God by the Angell Gabriel unto Zacha∣rias the priest, as he was executing his charge; foretelling the birth of Iohn the Baptist, who should be the fore runner of our Saviour Christ, and prepare the way before him: togither with the signe that was given to Zacharias of the truth of it; and his wives conceaving according to the word of the Lord, from vers 4. to the 26th. Thirdly, the message sent  from God unto the virgin Mary by the ministerie of the same Angell; wherein he
doth (first) salute her with assurance of great favour in the sight of God, and (se∣condly) foretelleth unto her the concep∣tion and birth of our saviour in and of her wombe, being a virgin; by the working of the holy ghost. And also (thirdly) confirmeth the same to her by the tydings of her cousin Elizabeth's conceaving, who was called barren. Whereunto is added Mary's faith, and submission to the will of God. From thence to vers 39. Fourthly, we have Maryes visitation and  salutation of Elizabeth: and againe Eli∣zabeths salutation and blessing of Mary, and manifestation of that which should come to passe. to vers 46. Fiftly, Ma∣ries  magnificat or song of praise, which she (by the motion of the spirit) uttered presently upon the hearing of Elizabeth's wordes. From thence to vers 57. Sixtly,  and lastly, we have declared to us the birth of John the Baptist, his circumcision, and denomination, both by his father and mother (agreing in one) contrary to the mindes of their kinred and friendes: yet according to the direction of the Angell before he was conceaved, to the great astonishment of them which dwelled
there about. Whereunto is added the opening of Zacharias his mouth (who had bin dombe from the time that the Angell first spake unto him of these things) and his prophesying not only of his owne son who was to be the fore runner, but also of the Messias himself. Thence to the end of this chapter. This scripture is very large, & plenti∣full of heavenly doctrines, & the time but short werein we are to treat upon the sa∣me: I shall therfore passe by all that might be spoken both from the generall scope, and many particuler arguments in the sa∣me, and addresse my selfe only to the 33th verse, whence I shall desire to speake a fewe wordes to edification exhortation & comfort; as God shall make me able, and so give place. The wordes are thus. And he shallVers 33. raigne over the house of Iacob for ever: and of his kingdome there shalbe none end. The which wordes are a part of the second par∣ticuler or branch of the third generall part of this chapter according to the former division, to wit, the testimony which the Angell giveth unto Mary, the virgin of our Saviour Christ, who was to be concea∣ved
in, & borne of her body. And they ha∣ve dependance upon the foregoeing wor∣des being connexed or coupled thereunto by the conjunction And. The Angell (ha∣ving said unto her that she should con∣ceave and bring forth a sonne, and should call his name Jesus) goeth on to declare his power and majesty, saying, he shalbe great and shalbe called the son of the highest, and the Lord shall give unto him the throne of his father David: whereunto he addeth (for the further setting forth of this his regall power) these wordes which I have taken in hand to speake from, saying, And he shall raigne over the house of Jacob for ever, and of his Kingdome there shalbe none end. So that the wordes are a part of the declaration which the Angell maketh of the kingly office of Christ, whom we are to understand by the word, He, that is the child Jesus before spoken of. The wordes, (though they need no division at all into parts, becaus they are one entire sentence, and spoken of one person without difference of time or place, &c. yet they) afford unto usConclusions▪ these three things as three seuerall pro∣positions in them layd downe, and by us
to be considered, as namely, First, that Je∣sus  Christ who was borne of this virgin Mary is a king. Secondly, that his king∣dome  is the house of Jacob. Thirdly,  that his kingdome hath or shall have no end, but is everlasting. In the handling of which propositions divers considerations might be had worthy our labour and attendance, if the occasion would give leave, but what can an houres time afford us in the handling of that subject which requireth our whole lives meditation, and contemplation? Therfore I shalbe very briefe herein.Christ is a King. And first, that he is a king none that be∣lieveth in him will deny, yet (that our faith may not be mere Imagination, or our knowledge nothing but fancie) we may see the old and new testament full of proofes. First we have the testimony ofPsal. 2: 6. God him selfe saying, yet have I set my king upon my holy hill of Syon. His pro∣phets also have witnessed the same, and that not one but many yea all of them agreing therein as saith the scripture And to him beare all the Act. 10: 43 prophets witnes saying, they shall Ier. 30: 9. serve the Lord their God and David their king, whom I will raise up
unto them. And David my servant Ezek. 27: 24. shalbe ug over them and they all shall have one eepheard, &c. Whole psalmes are penned  way of prophesying, and Ps. 45: 1. speaking  the things concerning this king. And olomon in his song of loves speaking in e person of the spouse of Christ saith, raw me, Cant. 1: 4. we will run after thee: the ng hath brought me into his chambers, &c, e is called by Daniel Dan. 9: 25. And. 12: 1. Messiah the prince; d Michael the great prince which stand∣h for the children of his people. And the ophet Zachary comforteth Jerusalem ying, Rejoyce greatly, ô Zech. 9: 9. daughter of on; shout, o daughter of Ierusalem: Be∣ld they king cometh unto thee: he is just, d having salvation, lowly, and riding upon  asse, and upon a coalt the foale of an asse. he which prophesie we have read Mat. 21: 5. per∣rmed in none but in this child Jesus, of hom we now speak. Of whom the Lord so speaketh by his prophet saying, Be∣ld the dayes come, that I will raise unto avid a righteous Ier. 23: 5. branch, and a king shall igne, and prosper, and shall execute judge∣ent, and justice, in the earth. Wee have is also proved by the testimony of hrist himself, who (speaking of his owne
second coming, and pronounceing his sen∣tance of Judgment upon all) saith, The Mat. 25: 34 shall the king say unto them on his righ hand, Come ye blessed of my father, &c. And being before Pilate he testifieth that hi Iohn 18: 36. 37. kingdome was not of this world (which sheweth that he confessed himself to be a king) And being asked further by Pilate whither he were a king then? he answe∣red, Thou saiest that I am a king. To this end was I borne, and for this cause came into the world, that I should beare witne unto the truth, &c. The whole multi∣tude of the disciples honour him with thi title saying, Luc. 19: 38. Blessed be the king th cometh in the name of the Lord, &c. Na∣thanael also doubted not (with courage▪ and boldnes) to say Ioh. 1: 49. Rabbi, thou art th son of God, thou art the king of Israel. Th wise men (at his birth) not only presen him with a gift for a king, but they als acknowledge it by their diligent enquiry after him saying, Mat. 2: 2. 11. where is he that is bor king of the Iewes? yea Pilate himselfe wh unjustly condemned him unto death coul not but give this testimony of him in th superscription on his crosse, Math. 27: 37. This is I¦sus the king of the Iewes. And though h
were intreated by the chiefe priests of the Jews to Iohn 19: 21. 22. write otherwise, yet he would not. And the scripture entitleth him (as he indeed is) King Reu. 1: 5. and 17: 14. and 19: 16. of kings and Lord of Lords. And he is said in other places to have a kingdome: and therefore must needes be a king, Col. 1: 13. 2 Tim. 4: 1. And although we have here such a cloudThings be∣longing to a King are perfectly in Christ. of witnesses to prove this point unto us, enough to convince the mind and con∣science of any but such as shut their eyes against the truth; yet it may be further manifested by severall instances of the thinges necessarily appertayning to a King and kingdome, the which we may at arge find in Christ, and that in a more ranscendent manner, and with more glo∣rious majestie and honour, than in all the princes and kings (yea Emperors) in the world though we put them all together. And first for his investing into his place1 Anointed. nd office, which is indeed his calling hereunto, whereby he hath power to exe∣cute the same. Wee know there is no earthly king, but he must be first crow∣ed; annointed, or in some other way or manner, according to the custome of the countrie, invested into that dignity before
he shalbe acknowledged or owned for a lawfull governour. And this must be done by those that have right to performe the same; or els he is but an usurper. Nowe we shall finde in scripture, that the ceremony used unto those kinges whom God did espetially appoint over his peo∣ple, was 1 Sam. 9: 16 1 Sam. 16: 13. 1 King. 1: 34. 1 King. 19: 15. 16. annointing, as in Saul, David, Solomon, Hazael, Iehu, and others. And this we shall finde most amply and large∣ly performed unto Christ, for he is anoin∣ted with the oyle of gladnes above his fel∣lowes. And (that we may not doubt of his lawfull unction) we must knowe that it is not an humane unction, but it is God him∣selfe (his eternall father, and our father inPs. 45: 7. and 2: 6. Act. 4: 27. him, by whom kings raigne & princes decree justice, who setteth up and pulleth downe kings, and buildeth and destroyeth king∣domes at his pleasure) who hath anointed him: And that not with oile or ointment such as earthly kings use, or which are compounded by the art of an Apothecary (as was the pretious ointment of the sanctuary) but he is anointed with the Act. 10: 31. holy ghost; & that not in measure & propor∣tion (as the Lord anointed Saul, David, and Solomon, by giving them of his spirit to di∣rect
thē some in a lesse & some in a grea∣ter measure) but he hath the fulnes of the Spirit, having it not measured Ioh. 3: 34. out unto him, but having the spirit dwelling in him, in that he is partaker, and communicateth of the Col. 2: 9. godhead bodily, & doth dispence the gifts and graces of his spirit plentifully to whom he pleaseth, it being of his Ioh. 1: 14. 16. Ephes 4: 7. 2 Lavves. ful∣nes that we have received, & grace for grace. An other spetialty or particuler be∣longing to kinges is, that they have lawes and sttutes whereby they governe, order, and dispose their kingdomes and the af∣faires of the same: So Christ hath left us his testament, or covenant, old and new, whereby we are to be governed: therein are contayned the good, just, & wholsome statutes and commandements which he hath commanded unto us and wherewith he doth rule his kingdome. And the law of Christ is not a cruell bondage or ty∣ranicall yoke, but perfet freedome, an easy yoke a light burden a service of love. Men shall not need to be at great chargesIoh. 13: 34. And 15: 12. 17. Gal. 6: 2. Ioh. 14: 21. 15. Ioh. 15: 10. to traine up their children at scholes col∣ledges and Innes of court (as they must to instruct them in the lawes common or civile of cities and countries, wherein they
have need to read over & studie many sta∣tute bookes charters & recordes) to bring them to the knowledge of Christ's lawes for they are all comprised in one little booke, the bible (which may in a short ti∣me be read over & is plaine & easie to be understood) yea in two tables where in are but ten wordes or precepts, nay (which is more) they are all comprised in one word which is this Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thine heart & thy neighbour as thy selfe. A third particuler in a King is,3 Ministers. that he hath his messengers, and ministers, heralds of armes, & other officers to attend upon him, to be ready at his command, to put in execution his warrants, & commis∣sions, for the safeguard of his subjects, and for the repelling & cutting off of rebelis▪ & such as are enemies to him & his king¦dome: So hath Christ our king an innume¦rable companie of Angels & heavenly cre¦aures, who are of a spirituall substance, an therefore speedy in dispatch and strong i power, which are alwayes at hand to exe¦cute his service either in safeguard and tu¦tion of them who shalbe Heb. 1: 14. heires of salv¦tion (as in saving Lot from out of the d¦struction of Sodome) or in destruction
the enemyes of his truth, one of which is enough to destroy the whole army of 2 King. 19: 35. Senacherib king of Syria, and (being com∣manded) to destroy all the first borne of Egipt both man & beast, but in the meane time to preserve the first borne of Israel. He hath also his ministers on earth, his pro∣phets Eph. 4: 11. Apostles, pastors, Euangelists, teachers &c, to execute his commissions and pro∣clayme his statutes and decrees unto all his subjects. Unto whom he hath committed his law & gospell the keyes Mat. 16: 19 of the king∣dome of heaven by the preaching where∣of they open the same kingdome to peni∣ent & beleeving persons, but shut it aga∣nst impenitent and unbeleevers. Whom e hath commanded to lift up their voices like Isa. 58: 1. trumpets, to cry alowde and by the pronounceing & denuntiation of his judg∣ment, to bynd Psa. 149: 8. kinges with chaines & princes with fetters of irō; but by preaching the glad ydings of saluation, to binde up the Isa. 61: 2. 4. broken earted; to proclayme liberty to the captives, nd the opening of prison to them that are ound, to comfort thm that mourne in Syon, o give unto them beauty for ashes, the oile of y for mourning, the garment of praise or the spirit of heavines, &c. He hath
also many other servants and Ambassa∣dors as affliction, sicknes death, judgement and the like, which are also ready at his command, yea there is nothing in heaven or earth, visible, or invisible that is crea∣ted, but is at his becke and pleasure. With the meanest of which he is able to devoure and destroy kingdomes and countryes, and to master the proudest hearts that are, as witnes the flies, lice, and caterpillers, of Egipt. Such furniture hath not all the kinges, princes, Bassha∣wes, great Turkes, and Emperors in the world, though they were at one time Mo∣narches of all the earth. Furthermore4 Throne of state. kinges have their thrones or seates of state whereon they sit to shew their Majestie and power. And (of all that we read of) Solomon is said to have the statelyest 1 King. 10: 18. 19. 20. throne of any of the Kinges of the Earth: yet Christ's throne is farre above it; he is Colos. 1: 16. 17. farre above all principallities and powers; he is set on Heb. 8: 1. and 12: 2. Reu. 3: 21. the right hand of the throne of the Majesty in the heavens; the heavens is his throne, and the earth his foot stoole. Here might one thing be incerted which should have bin in one of the first places mentio∣ned5 Right to the Crovvne. but was for gotten namely, that there
ought to be in the person of him that is made a king, or prince; a lawfull right to the crowne, which cometh either by In∣heritance or conquest; when either the kingdome or royalty descendeth to a per∣son from an other as being the lawfull heire and successor to whome the crowne doth belong, as his proper patrimony, from whom it may not be justly detayned; or when upon a just occasion of warre, or combate the same is obtayned by the sword and conquest as we may read in stories of divers. In both these respects Christ hath the proper and peculiar right of the kingdome. First by inheritance,By inheri∣tance. he is the lawfull heire, to whome by right of inheritaunce the kingdome and the power and the glory apperteyneth for he is the only begotten son of God, being in respect of his godhead equall with the father by whome are all thinges and from whome all thinges proceed, by whom all thinges were made, and with out whom nothing was made that was made. The heaven of heavens is his, and so is the earth and all that therein is, the round world and they that dwell therein. And secondly,And con∣quest. in respect of conquest, he hath fought the
renowned and bloodie battell for his elect the members of his kingdome, whereby he hath freed them out of the handes of their enemies, and so hath thereby pur∣chased to him selfe to be their king. For man having by his sin and transgression made himselfe the bond slave of Satan, and liable to the severe wrath and judg∣ment of Almightie God; it pleased the son of God out of his inestimable 1 Ioh. 3: 16. love unto his elect to step in and become their mediator (according to the everlasting counsell of the father) and offered him∣selfe to be the redeemer of Israel his cho∣sen, and to breake the Gen. 3: 15. head (that is to overcome and vanquish the power) of the serpent (that is the divell and Satan that adversay and deceaver) and to satisfie the Justice and wrath of God who was so highly displeased with mans transgression: All which he hath perfectly performed for us in our nature by his sufferings and resurrection, and continueth to finish and make up the same by his intercession at the right hand of the Majestie on high whither he is ascended, and where he sit∣teth nutill Psa. 110: 1. all his enemyes are made his footstoole, from whence also in the meane
time he sendeth us the Ioh. 16: 7. 13. comforter, even the spirit of truth, who leadeth us unto all truth and by whom we are Eph. 4: 30. sealed unto the day of redemption. What should we say more? there might be here instanced many particulers (were there time and ability to performe the same) to prove that Christ is king, but what need is there, seing none amongst us denyeth it? besides the deeper we goe into the laying out thereof, the more we shall find yet to doe, and there should be no end of declaring the Maje∣sty, and glory, of Christ our king. I shall6 A King∣dome. proceed therefore to the next particuler which belongeth to a king, and that is a kingdome; for it is a word of relation, there can be no king without a king∣dome. This particuler the text offereth in the next place to our consideration, saying, And he shall reigne over the house of Iacob, &c. So that the house of Ja∣cobThe house of Iacob. is the kingdome of Christ. Wherein we must take heed that we understand not the wordes literally as they here stand; for then there will some inconveniencies or absurdities follow: for wee all know what Jacob was, namely, the son of Isaac
whose name wes changed, and he was cal∣led Israel, and all his posteritie Israelites, after his name. So that literally the house of Jacob is the family seed and posterity of Israel, the Jewes, that antient people whom God did accept into covenant with him, to whom (in daies of old) per∣tainedRom. 9: 4. 5. the adoption, and glory, and the cove∣nants, and the giving of the lawe; & the ser∣vice of God, and the promises; whose are the fathers, and of whom (as concerning the flesh) Christ came; who are nowe (for their sins) dispersed, and scattered farre and nigh throughout the world, are cast out of the vineyard of God for their ill husbandrie. And if it should be over this only that Christ should raigne, then his kingdome would not be so great as becometh such a great and potent king to have. There∣fore the words may not thus be under∣stood. Besides we shall find in scripture divers other speeches of Christ in the like kinde, that should they be understood li∣terally could not but be absurd to con∣ceave, as namely, (among many) that of the prophet Jeremy who saith And they Ier. 30: 9. shall serve the Lord their God and David their king whom I will raise up unto them.
Which if it should be understood literal∣ly, were absurd; but being understood of Christ (of whom David was a type, and of his house and lineage Christ should arise, and so be David his son according to the flesh) then the speech is proper, and the prophesie verified as we assuredly know and beleeve. So when as God saith of Solomon 1 Chron. 17: 12. 14. I will establish his throne for ever, and I will settle him in myne house, and in my kingdome for ever, and his throne shalbe established for evermore; if it be understood only of Solomon the son of David who imediatly succeeded him in the kingdome, and built the Lord an house, wee see it is otherwise come to passe, yea and it came so to passe (not long after his death) that the kingdome was divided, and his throne was not esta∣blished in that state and dignity as then Davids was, but ten tribes thereof rent from him; and now we see on earth no footsteps of his earthly dominion. But if it be understood of Christ the true So∣lomon (of whom the other was a figure) who is also the true and naturall seed of David, that promise of God holdeth firme unto eternity. And this may be plainly
understood by a speech of David himselfe in his life time spoken by the spirit of pro∣phesie, saying, Psal. 16: 10. thou wilt not leave my soule in hell: neither wilt thou suffer thine holy one to see corruption. The which speech the Apostle Act 2: 29. 30. 31. Peter doth largely shew not to be spoken by the prophet of himselfe, though he speaketh in his owne person for he hath seen corruption, being dead and buryed and rotten in grave many hundred yeares since: but that he spake it concerning Christ whom God raised up, and he sawe no corruption. It being thus then, it followeth that we enquire and labour to understand whom it is that the holy ghost intendeth here by the house of Jacob. Wee must know ther∣fore that all the faithfull people of God, such as have bin, are or shalbe truly con∣verted to the faith of the gospell, which was preached unto Gen. 3: 15. Adam, shadowed out by divers ceremonies of the lawe, prophe∣sied of by the prophets, & in the fulnes of time manifestly accomplished by Christ himselfe the mediator of the new cove∣nant and which wee (through the mercy of God) have receaved, those are the true house of Jacob, of what countrie, nation,
people, or language soeuer they be. Al∣though many proofes might be brought to manage this interpretation, yet bearing in mynd what formerly hath bin spoken it will not be so absolutly necessary to spend time therein. Notwithstanding that the thing may shine the more clearly to our sence it shalbe suffitient evidence, if we doe read with understanding the nineth chapter of the epistle to the Romanes throughout at our leasure, there we shall see this very point plainly demonstrated, and manie scriptures therein opened, which doe further declare the same where∣in the Apostle doth plainly prove that all are not Israel that are of Israel, and so consequently they are not only the house of Jacob who are so according to the flesh. Neither are they only the chil∣dren of God that are the naturall seed of Abraham, but the children of the promise are counted for the seed, that is, they that are of the faith of Abraham they are in∣deed the true seed of Abraham, they are the true house of Jacob, whither they be Jewes or Gentiles, circumcised or uncir∣cumcised, male or female bond or free. These priviledges or conditions doe nei∣ther
further nor hinder; God is no respe∣cter of persons, all are one in Christ Jesus. For it is by the bloud of Jesus Christ (the vertue whereof we apply unto our selves by faith) that we (who some timesEph. 2: 11. 12. 13. &c. were farre off (being gentiles and uncir∣cumcised in the flesh) yea which were without Christ being aliens from the com∣monwealth of Israel, strangers from the covenant of promise, having no hope, and without God in this present world) are now made nigh; for he is our peace who hath made both one, and hath broken downe the middle wall of partition be∣tweene us, &c. So that we are now no more strangers and forreyners, but fel∣low citizens with the saints, and of the household of God. For as by circum∣cision (after they had embraced the pro∣mise to Abraham and law of Moses) those that were strangers, and not of the seed of Jacob, made themselves Israelites in a kinde, and pertakers of the same cove∣nant, and promises, and submitted them selves unto, and were made partakers of the lawes and ordinances with them, which none that was a stranger indeed might partake of: So by faith (which
worketh by love) we are made actually the true seed of Abraham, to whom God hath respect principally in all his promi∣ses. For he is not a Rom. 2: 28. 29. Iew which is one outwardly, neither is that circumcision which is outward in the flesh: but he is a Iew wch is one inwardly, and circumcision is that of the heart in the spirit and not in the letter, whose praise is not of men but of God. The Apostle doth further plainly Rom. 15: 9. &c. affirme the gentiles that shall beleeve to be within this family, and that by evident testimo∣nies out of the prophets, amongst which he bringeth in Esaias saying in this wise, There shalbe the roote of Iesse, and he that  shall rise to raigne over the gentiles, in him shall the gentiles trust. Nowe the reason why the church of Christ dispersed throughout the world is called the house of Jacob, may be, becaus it hath had her begining in the house of Iacob. The law (we know) was promi∣sed to come Isa. 2: 3. out of Syon, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem, And the Psal∣mist saith, the Lord shall send the rod Pr. 110: 2. of thy strength out of Syon: rule thou in the midst of thine enemies. And our saviour saith, Salvation Iohn 4: 22. is of the Iewes; and it
was promised (as we read) particulerly unto Abraham, that he should be a father of many Gen. 17: 4. 7. nations, and (saith the Lord) I will establish my covenant betweene m and thee, and thy seed after thee, in their generations, for an everlasting covenant to be a God unto thee and unto thy seed after thee. And Christ (as the Apostle Paul witnesseth) was the minister Rom. 15: 8. of circum∣cision, and he was raised up among the Jewes, and sent to the lost sheepe of the house Math. 15: 24. Math. 10: 6. of Israel, and his Apostles first offered the meanes of grace unto them, and amongst them it was first receaved (wit∣nes the calling of Christs disciples) thoug in a very poore and small measure, and b their resisting and despiseing of the trut Act. 13: 46. of God, their Rom. 11: 11. stumbling at the stum¦bling stone, salvation is issued forth thenc unto the gentiles, and they are made pa¦takers of the grace of God, and so th kingdome of Christ is increased, prop¦gated, and extended, to the endes of th earth, God by a new and marveilous l¦ving way ingraffing the gentiles into th family of Jacob, and making them th house of Israel, who were before outcast and of no reputation, yet so as that th
Iewes are as the first borne sonnes in the house, they are as the naturall Rom. 11: 17. 18. branches in the good olive tree, and we wild olives planted in, for as many as joyned themsel∣ves by faith and love to the sons of Abra∣ham they are accounted the true Israel. And although that the nation of the Iewes have a great part of them by their apo∣stating and goeing astray in their rebel∣lion and resisting the worke of God's grace through ignorance in unbeliefe shut themselves out of this family: yet we must know, beleeve, and be verely persuaded that the Lord hath had a remnant, yea hath, and still will have a remnant (accor∣ding to the election of grace) whom he hath gathered and will in his time gather ogether from the outcasts of Israel accor∣ding to that Rom 11: 5. 7. 15. 25. 29. mistery revealed by the ministrie of the Apostle Paul. So that now it seemeth to me (in some measure) plainly manifested, who is this ouse of Iacob here spoken of, and over whom it is that Christ doth raigne and ule. It now resteth that we speakeThe Condi∣tion of Christs Kingdome. omewhat, of what condition this king∣ome is, and how Christ doth administer s kingly power in and over the same,
and this the rather becaus we see no great countrie or people in the world, over whom Christ doth visibly raigne, in his proper person, as kinges and princes in the world doe. And here indeed cometh the mystery of mysteries, that though Christ be a King, & hath a Kingdome, yea and the house of Iacob be his Kingdome yet the glorie of this kingdome and his administration of the same is not to be seen in wordly pompe, and excellencie, which Earthly Kings and princes are so richly adorned with: but that it is most commonly (in respect of outward appea∣rance and luster) of a sad countenance, of mean and lowe estate, not many wise men after the flesh; not many mightie, not many noble are called to be members of this Kingdome, but God hath chosen the weake thinges of the world, foolish thinges and1 Cor. 1: 26. 27. 28. base things of the world, men of meane callings for the most part, men of small humane gifts and qualifications, those that are poore in Mat. 5: 3. spirit theirs is the king∣dome of God, such as are Mat. 11: 28. weary an heavie laden, such as mourne and are Psa. 25: 9. meeke, such as Mat. 5: 5. 6. hunger and thirst, and are wretched Reu. 3: 17. Luc. 1: 52. 53. miserable poore and blind
and naked. And this is that no flesh should glory 1 Cor. 1: 29. in his presence. If we looke upon the face or outward beutie of his king∣dome, alas! when he himselfe was upon earth, the foxes had Luc. 9: 52. holes, and the bir∣des of the ayre had nests, but he had not a hole wherein to put his head: and if thus with the king, what could be expecte in his subjects? After his suffering, his Apostles and churches, howe were they persecuted? How were they tormented and afflicted from place to place? Ha∣ving no 1 Cor. 4: 11. certaine dwelling place. If we looke to the times after them, we may see the house of Jacob so poore, the Church of Christ so small, and so disper∣sed, that there were scarce the footsteps thereof to be seen, though yet God hath bin alwayes pleased to reserve a Church to himselfe in the midst of the very grea∣test defections (though not so greatly shewing it self) as our Ecclesiasticall hi∣stories doe at large manifest; yea now at this day in the times of reformation, what glory doe we see the kingdome of Christ n, in the sight of the world? it is like unto the temple built after the Hag. 2: 3. captivity in comparison with the former built by
King Solomon, even as nothing. There where it flourisheth most, it is but the least nomber; the glory of the world doth farre overtop the outward beauty and glory of the kingdome of Christ. Let us not marvaile at this brethren, the reason of all this is plaine; becaus Christ's King∣dome is not of this world, not from hence, he is not an earthly prince, a worldly po∣tentate a temporall governour: but he is an heavenly Monarch, a spirituall king, an Isa. 9: 6. 7. eternall prince. He came downe from heaven to take upon him our nature, the person of man, that he might admi∣nister this this office whereunto he was of old ordayned; and he is ascended up into heaven againe, and there sitteth on the right hand of the majesty on high, on his heavenly throne, administring this his Kingly office. That Christ his king∣dome is not an earthly kingdome, I hope none here doth once question or doubt; yet how ever, to strengthen our faith▪ we may take notice that Christ himselfe testifyeth it, saying, My Ioh. 18: 36. Kingdome is n of this world: if my kingdome were of this world, then would my servants fight, that  should not be delivered to the Iewes: but no
is my kingdome not from hence: whereas if his kingdome had bin earthly, he might lawfully (yea must) have challenged it. But we find that on the contrary Christ did avoyd and refuse the glory Ioh. 6: 15. of the world, which if his Kingdome had bin earthly he might have taken. Besides (which is more) he paid tribute Mat. 17: 27. unto Caesar the Earthly prince, in whose ter∣ritories he resided, thereby testifying that his kingdome was not temporall or earth∣ly; which if it had bin, he had done it great disadvantage, in paying that to an other, which he might rightly have demanded to himselfe. Yea the scripture telleth us plainly in divers 2 Tim. 4: 18. Heb. 11: 16. And 12: 22. Mat. 16: 19. Hovv Christ doth admini∣ster his Kingly office. places that his king∣dome is heavenly. So then it followeth, seing it is not an Earthly, but an heavenly kingdome, how Christ doth execute & administer this his office in and over the subjects of his King∣dome? The subjects of Christ his king∣domeIer. 3: 14. Act. 2: 9. 10. 11. we have before said not to be one nation or another, but in and of all na∣tions, countryes, kinreds, tribes, langua∣ges, those that are truly converted unto the faith of his gospell, or (to goe yet further) whom God hath (according to
his determinate counsell and decree from before the foundation of the world) pre∣destinated unto grace here, and glory hereafter, these are the subjects and mem∣bers of his Kingdome. In and over whom Christ doth administer his kingly office; first by giving and publishing his holy word unto men, and bestowing gifts upon men, and inabling them to declare and preach his gospell, and manifest and reveale the secret mysteries of his hea∣venly doctrine to them. This is like unto the decrees statutes and proclama∣tions which earthly kinges put forth for the calling of their subjects to obedience, and shewing to them what they ought to doe, and what they ought to shun, that they may not be brought under the pe∣nalty of transgression; And this is that whereby earthly princes make their sub∣jects inexcusable if they doe not obey. And hereby our King Christ leaveth all the world, and sons of Adam without ex∣cuse, in that he hath spread abroad his Rom. 10: 18. word will and lawe unto them, that if they doe not come and yeild themselves to his scepter it is their owne fault, they have nothing whereby to excuse them∣selves:
yea the Psal. 19. VVth Rom. 1: 20. workes of God (which are plainly to be seen of all) are enough to leave them without excuse. But this is not all, he goeth further than any earthly king or potentate can doe, for he giveth them not only his word and the ministry thereof, but he also addeth thereunto the work of his gratious spirit, by whom he worketh so effectually in the hearts of his elect, that they have the lawe thereby written in their Ier. 31: 33. 34. hearts, and they are made to knowe the Lord from the least to the greatest, and they are converted and brought to the knowledge and obedience of his will, so as that they can not resist or avoyd it, for those whom he Rom. 8: 30. pre∣destinateth them he also calleth, though they be never so much in ignorance, yea though they be (as the Apostle Act. 9: 4. 5. Paul was) per∣secutors of his Church and enemies to his gospell. Furthermore, having thus converted them, and that they are be∣come his subjects, then he continueth to rule and governe them by the same his word and worke of his spirit, and encrease all grace sanctification and holines in them, making them more and more to growe in grace and in the knowledge of
him and of his will, and preserveth them in this their estate and condition (more powerfully than any earthly kings can their subjects) from the violence and po∣wer of their enemyes, Sin, Satan, the flesh, the world▪ death, and all thinges whatsoeuer which doe any wise resist the worke of God's grace in them: and mak∣eth them more than Rom. 8: 37. Conquerors, and pre∣serveth them unto the end in such a man∣ner that the Math. 16: 18. gates of hell are not able to prevaile against them, and at length having overcome and trampled under foote all their enemyes, he maketh them absolute possessors of his kingdome of glory with him, where they shall have eternall peace without warre, joy without mourning, and true happinesse without the least thought or sence of anie affliction what∣soeuer. The which bringeth me to theChrist's king∣dome is Eter∣nall. next particuler in this text, to wit, and of his Kingdome there shall be none end. The which wordes affirme unto us thus much▪ That the kingdome and dominion of Christ Jesus in and over his church and people is everlasting. Dan. 4: 3. 34. Nebucchadnezzar that great king confessed this when he sayeth his Kingdome is an everlasting king∣dome,
and his dominion is from generation to generation: It is said of Mount Psa. 125: 1▪ Syon (that is the church of Christ) that it can not be removed, but abideth for ever. God hath declared (in 1 Chron. 17: 14. Solomon his servant who was a type of Christ) that his throne shalbe established for ever. And the Apostle Peter 2 Pet. 1: 11. calleth it the everlasting kingdome of our Lord and saviour Iesu Christ. Daniel the prophet also (in the declaring of his visions) saith that his king∣dom is Dan. 7: 27: an everlasting Kingdome, and all dominions shall serve and obey him▪ For as for the gathering constituting and pro∣pagating of his Kingdome here on Earth, this hath lasted from the begining of the world, and shall endure unto the end the∣reof, becaus at all times, and in every moment, there hath bin, are, and shalbe ome (more or lesse) members of this kingdome gathering themselves together, seperating from the world, and joyning hemselves in communion. And as for he perfecting of it, that shall last after his life is ended, even for ever and ever, or the 1 Ths. 4▪ 17. Apostle (speaking of the last day) saith that the dead in Christ shall rise rst, then we wch are alive and remaine
shalbe caught up together with them in the cloudes, to meet the Lord in the aire: and so shall we ever be with the Lord. And (in another place) when the end cometh then he shall deliver up the kingdome to God the father having put downe all rule and 1 Cor. 15: 24. all authority and power; for after that there shalbe no more need of ruling, defending gathering, and prospering his church, for there shalbe no more sin or corruption to resist them, their corruption having put on incorruption; Satan shall no more tempt them, for he shalbe now utterly cast into the lake there to remaine with hsi cursed crew in perpetuall and irreco∣verable torments; the wicked shall have no more fight against them, for they shalbe all overcome by the battaile that shalbe Reu. 19: 20. fought by the lambe; and all ungodly men and sinners that know not God and obey not the gospell of our Lord Jesus Christ shall then have their portion with hypocrites and unbeleevers in the lake which burneth with fire and brimstone▪ death and hell shall not prevaile agains them, for they shalbe Reu. 20: 14. also cast into th lake of fire, they shalbe both overcome and mortality shall have put on Immor∣tality;
and the sting of death, the victorie and power of the grave shalbe quite van∣quished; and there shalbe no more curse, nor trouble, nor sorrow, but all teares shalbe wiped away from their eyes for they shall then see the king in his glory, themselves being possessors of that ful∣nesse of joy in the presence of the Lord, and those Psal. 16: 11. pleasures which are at his right hand for evermore. Thus having briefly run through the particulers of this weighty subject where∣in so much might be spoken (if time would permit) let us make some use and application of what hath bin spoken, and so give place. First, seing that Christ1 Vse: is a King, and that not an earthly one, but heavenly and spirituall, even the king of kings, and Lord of Lordes; it serveth to set foorth the great stubbornnesse igno∣rance, and rebellion that is in the world; for we see but verie fewe that yeild obe∣dience to him. Wee know what the Lord saith by the prophet, Mal. 1: 6. If I be a father, where is myne honour? if a master, where is my feare? So may it be said here, if Christ be the eternall king and gover∣nour of his church, by whome kinges
raigne and princes decree justice; how cometh it that there is no more honour, no more feare, no more obedience shewed unto him? Earthly Kinges they have their obedience and feare largely bestow∣ed, and performed to wardes them: but this heavenly Prince he offereth his word, his lawe, he sendeth his messengers to call men to make peace with him, and to save their soules Reu. 18: 4. Act. 2: 40. by coming out of sin, and forsaking their lustes and pleasures, but men will not heare, they will none Isa. 5: 24. Iob 21: 14. Luc. 19: 14. of his lawe, they will not have this man to rule over them. Let all such know (be they never so great and mighty here on Earth, whither hard hearted Pharaoh, wise Achitophell, or proud Nebucchad∣nezzar) that if they will not willingly submit themselves under his yoke, to be ruled by his scepter, and guided by his Psal. 2: 4. rod and staffe; let them know (Isay) that he hath an iron rod wherwith he will Psal. 2: 9. bruise them as small as the dust and dash them in pieces like a potters vessell. And although for a time they dominere and vaunt in their glory like Nebucchad∣nezzar Pharaoh and Senacherib insulting against God & his son Jesus Christ whom
he hath anointed to be Lord and Christ: let them know further that at length he will visite them in his wrath and vexe themPsal. 2: 2. 5. in his sore displeasure. Againe, is Christ the king of his2 Vse. church? is he the ruler over the house of Jacob? and hath he bin pleased to call us, and plant us in that his family, and houshold? Then let us, first, be thank∣full  to the Lord, who hath delivered us from the wrath to come, hath brought us out of the power of Satan, into the King∣dome of his deare son, and delivered us from the darknesse and rebellion wherein the world is over whelmed, and made us pertakers of the Inheritance of his saints n light. Secondly, let us in feare and  reverence yeild obedience to his laws will and word; let us be observant of his ministers that proclaime his statutes and ordinances unto us; and let us give dili∣gent heed and regard unto the same that we may walke in his pathes all the daies of our lives. And herein let us be watch∣full and take heed that we be not decea∣ed with humane invention in stead of the word of God and will of Christ. Where∣fore it is required that we try the spirits
1 Ioh. 4: 1. whither they be of God. Be like the no∣ble Bereans, Act. 17: 11. search the scripture whither thinges be so or no: and when we find any thing put upon us that is not correspon∣dent to the law of our King Christ, let us take heed of it, shun it, cast it from us, though it should come even by an Angell from heaven. Is Christ our King? and is his king∣dome3 Vse. not an earthly but an heavenly, a spirituall kingdome, yea and but of meane state and shew for the most part in the sight of the world: let us then take heed that we be not deceaved by the great con∣course of people to this or that religion and worship; beware that we doe no Exod. 23: 2. followe a multitude to doe evill; see to▪ that we be not insnared by the many tha say, Math. 24: 23. here is Christ, and there is Christ becaus of the shew they make of Christ as if they were the only people becaus o their nomber, peace, agreement in do∣ctrine & discipline, loving affections &c. but let us try the truth it selfe; and wher we find it, imbrace it, and persevere in th profession of and obedience to it, thoug it be in never so mean and low estate in re∣spect of the world.
Moreover, is Christ a king? and is his4 Vse▪ ingdome not earthly, but heavenlie nd Spirituall? then here may plainlie be∣een the folly & madnes of the great rab∣ies and learned men in the world (I eane the popish rabble of prelates, esuits, seminaries, fryers, &c. yea of the ope himself and all his capped cardinals) ho pretend and professe themselves to e the only ministers of Christ; and yet nderstand not the condition of Christ's ingdome, as may be seen by their daylie ractise: for they place the chiefest part f their service in Masses, mummings, avings, washings, shrivings, bowing, ending, crossing, precession, whipping hemselves, pilgrimage, hermitage, knoc∣ing their breists, absteyning from meats, pparelling them selves like poppets and orish dancers, making Images of Christ, nd worshiping them, and a thousand such ke apish bables, worldly and carnall es; as if Christ's kingdome were earthly d carnall; and he to be served with such mane inventions: whereas indeed his ingdome is Spirituall, and he must be rved and worshipped in Ioh. 4 Spirit and uth. But for us who understand better
the nature and condition of Christ's king∣dome, let us beware least we be Colos. 2: 8. spoiled by any of them through their philosophie and vaine deceit (whereby they lye in wait to deceave the simple) after the tradition of men, after the rudiments of the world, and not after Christ. This may further teach us to magnifie5 Vse. the good will and mercie of God, for that he hath placed his Reu. 21: 3. tabernacle, his king∣dome, his church and family, here amongst men, and that not the richest, but he hath accepted of poore and meane men to be his subjects, the members of his king∣dome. Let us highly value and prize thi dignitie, as David did the having of Saul' daughter, he being but the son of Jess the 1 Sam. 18: 18. Bethlemite a poore man among th families of his fathers. Lastly, seing that Christ is our king, &6 Vse. his throne is in heaven, and his Kingdom shall have none end, but endure eternally let this serve to comfort and strengthen  against all temptations, afflictions, or ad¦versities which can, or doe in any wise be fall us in our yeilding obedience, an being subordinate to the lawes and statu¦tes of this our mightie prince. Doth Sata
tempt us, and our corrupt flesh entice us? let us couragiously resist, and remem∣ber that those whom God hath truly converted and called to his truth, he will not leave or forsake. Pray ther∣fore unto God to give strength and courage: the holy Spirit of Christ is ready to help us in the midst of tentations. Doe the pleasures and dignities of this world perswade and allure us, to leave the truth and walke with the world in her vanities? remember that the world 1 Ioh. 2: 17. 1 Pet. 1: 25. passeth away, and all things therein; but the king∣dome of God, the word of the Lord, that en∣dureth for ever. Let us set therfore before us the great Heb. 11▪ 26. recompence of reward which we shall have, if we continue on to feare the Lord; we shalbe made heires of an ever∣asting kingdome: whereas if we forsake him; he will forsake us, and cast us off for ever. Doe enemies revyle us, mock, persecute, and trouble us? remember that God is on Psa. 118: 6. our sides (whose kingdome is everlasting, and therfore he is of able po∣wer to save us, and for our mockings, re∣ylings, and persecutions, which we en∣dure here to give us an eternall Kingdome ereafter) therfore we need not feare what
man can doe against us. He hath ten Iud vera 14. thou∣sand thousands of Saints to guard us from all dangers he sendeth his good Nehem. 9: 20. Spirit to guide and instruct us, that we shall not be overcome by them and their humane lear∣ning; but the wisdome of the Spirit shalbe mightie in us, whereby wee shall beat 2 Cor. 1: 5. downe every strong hold both in our selves and others; and having fought the 1 Tim. 6: 12. good of faith here, we shall receave 2 Tim. 4: 8. the crowne of righteousnes hereafter, which the Lord the righteous Iudge shall give us at that day, and not to us only but to all them also that love his appearing. For the which appearing of him in glorie let us with all diligence daylie fit and prepare our selves, and with earnest affections and true faith ferventlie pray, saying, Come Rev. 22: 20. Lord Ie∣sus, come quickly. Even so be it. Amen. THE END.
THE Afflicted comforted Or The 45 chapter of Genesis gene∣rally opened, and the 5. 6. 7. and 8. verses therof more particulerly handled on the Lord's day, 20: mo Septembris 1641. Gen. Ca. 45. IN the reading of this chapterThe scope of the chapter. we may behold a pattern of the joyfull, comfortable, and happie issue which the Lord giveth to the afflictions and tryals of his people, in the persons of Iacob and his sons, whose great griefe and sorrow he suddainly tur∣neth into greater joy. All the sorrow which Iacob hitherto endured, by the losse of his son Ioseph, the hardnes of the famine, captivity of Simeon, feare of the losse of Benjamine &c were not compara∣ble to the comfort, which now he is made partaker of, by receaving the two latter,
and certaine assurance not only of the life, but also great honour and dignitie of the former. And all the terrour & anguish of mynd and couscience which the ten sons of Ja∣cob had felt by reason of Ioseph's carriage towards them, and the feare which they were in becaus the cup was taken in Ben∣jamin's sack; was nothing to the great peace and assurance which now they re∣ceaved, seing their brother (against whom they had sinned) so lovinglie to receave them, & forgive them the trespasse which they had done against him. Hitherto Ioseph had enforced himself to refraine the manifestation of himself, and his brotherly affection towardes his bretheren, and counterfeited a rigorous & rough carriage against them; that he might thereby try & know (the more certainly) the present estate and condition of hi father, his bretherens affection toward their father, and Benjamine his brother together with their devise, and invention whereby they had deluded their father▪ concerning the making away of Ioseph and also how his father had taken the loss of him hitherto. Of all which he bein
informed, by that patheticall & effectuall speech of Iudah (interceding for the dismission of Benjamine, and offering himself as a bondservant in his stead) whe∣reof we have read in the foregoeing chap∣ter: he can now no longer refraine him∣self, but is inforced to make himself kno∣wen to them, with great manifestations of his naturall affection, and tender love to them, notwithstanding the injurie they had done unto him. In the generall view of this chapterSpetiall things observable  the generall scope. we may take notice of manie thinges for our great use and profit; as first, what a good thing it is to rest upon the provi∣dence,  and disposing hand of God, in the manifold troubles of this life; yea what benefit cometh thereby unto our selves. Iacob, seing that it must be so, that he must let Benjamine goe from him intoGen. 13: 11. 14. Egypt, albeit he loved him so dearly, (having given his sons the best direction & counsell he could, whereby they might prosper, and returne in safety with their rother and committing the issue to God y prayer) he sett up his resolution to de∣end upon God's good pleasure in dispo∣ing the issue thereof, and if he were be∣reaved
of his children, to beare it: and now behold he receaveth not only his two sons whom he then so much desired, but also manifest hopes of the sight of Ioseph whom he had so long lost and never ex∣pected againe to see his face in this life. Whereby we may see that the patient abiding of the righteous never wayteth upon God in vaine; for the Psal. 9: 18. needy shall not allway be forgotten: the expectation of the poore shall not perrish for ever. And that God is able to doe exceeding aboundantly for his people Eph. : 20. above all that they can aske or thinke. Secondly, we have herein an excellent  type and figure of God's delivering his people from all troubles and afflictions & turning all their sorrowe and heavines into eternall joy and comfort, according to the manifold promises which he hath made to us for that purpose in the holy scripture. See (among other places) Psal. 30: 5. John. 16: 20. Jam. 1: 12. Apoc. 7: 17. Thirdlie, we maie take notice of the  providence and over ruling hand of God, which is not absent (but present) in the sins of wicked men (who doe hurt and
oppresse God's people) bridling, restrai∣ning, yea and turning their wicked pur∣poses, and actions often times to good events; so that when the wicked doe flat∣ter themselves in their evill, and ungodly affections, and grievously sin against him, and seeke no thing but the hurt and evill of his people: he in the meane time doth holily make use both of them and their sins (even as of instruments) for the set∣ting foorth of his glorie, and furthering the good and safety of the godly; (as the scripture saith of Pharaoh, Rom. 9: 17. Even for this same purpose have I raised thee up, that I might shew my power in thee, and that my name might be declared through out the earth. So that Rom. 8: 28. all things worke together for good to them that love God. Lastlie we have in this chapter a good4. An example of vertue in Ioseph. example of manie excellent vertues pre∣sented to us in Ioseph: wch we shall doe well not only to consider and meditate on, but also (upon all occasions) faith∣fullie to imitate and followe; as first, wis∣dome,1. VVisdome. that he putteth all out from him and dealeth alone with his bretheren, least he should divulge their evill (which was hitherto private between him and them)
to strangers to their great disgrace. Thus our saviour Christ Math. 18: 15. willeth his disciples to deale with their bretheren, in case of offence. And it is also the advise of So∣lomon, Prov. 25: 9. 10. to debate the cause with thy neighbour himselfe, and discover not the secret to another: least he that heareth it, put thee to shame, and thine infamie turne not away. Secondly, naturall affection and2. Naturall af∣fection. love toward his bretheren. For although he had hitherto handled more hardlie and severelie with them: yet now he sheweth how he was truly affected towardes them; and that he had done all this with a good mynd and intent. Thirdly, rea∣dinesse3. Readines to forgive. to forgive offences done unto him. For he doth not manifest himself to be any wise desirous, or a seeker of revenge; but for the great injuries and wrongs by them done against him, he bestoweth great favours and kindnesses upon them. And this is a vertue which we have all need to take spetiall notice of, and to fol∣low this good example: for the scripture commandeth us to be so farre from aven∣ging our selves on our enemie, that if he Rom. 12: 19. 20. hunger, we should feed him, if he thirst, give him drinke, and in so doeing we shall
heap coales of fire upon his head. And if thus much to our enemies, then much more to our brethren, whom we are so often required to forgive in a day, as to seventie times seven. Yea unlesse we forgive men their trespasses, how can we have any assurance that God Math. 6: 14. 15. hath forgiven us our trespasses. And naturall reason it self teacheth us to doe as we would be done unto. Wherfore the Apostle earnestly exhorteth the servants of Christ to be Eph. 4: 32. kind one to an other, tender hearted forgi∣ving one an other even as God for Christ's sake hath forgiven them. Fourthly of4. Meeknesse. meekenesse, and modestie. He abuseth not the power, and dignitie wherein he was now placed, neither arrogateth unto himselfe any thing, but willingly acknow∣ledgeth his bretheren being sheepheards, and confesseth himselfe the sonne of Ja∣cob a sheepheard. Fiftly of faith and5. Faith. knowledge of the providence and favour of God, by whom he professeth and acknowledgeth himselfe to be brought to this high dignitie, and giveth him thankes for it. And indeed it is to him alone that raise is to be given in such case, for  promotion cometh neither from the east nork Psa. 75: 6.
from the west nor from the south; but God is the judge, he putteth downe one and set∣teth up an other. It is he that Psal. 113: 7. 8. raiseth up the poore out of the dust, and lifteth the needie out of the dunghill that he may set him among princes &c. Sixtly, honour6. Honour to parents and love to breth∣ren. and reverence to his Exod. 20: 12. father, and respect to his bretheren; not leaving them in their necessity, but offereth to nourish them, and that freely and willingly: thinking, (yea and plainly acknowledging) that it was to this end Est. 4: 14. that he was by the po∣werfull providence of God brought to this great honour and dignitie, that his father & family might be preserved alive from the famine. All these graces and vertues which the scripture doth declare to appeare in this faithfull servant of God, are not set downe in vaine, but are written for our Rom. 15: 4. learning. And I wish they might be seriously mynded and dili∣gently followed by us: and then we shall have the comfortable experience that they are not mentioned in vaine. In the whole chapter (that we mayA generall division If the chap? come to some particuler whereon to in∣sist) we have these three generall parts.  First Joseph his manifestation of himself
to his bretheren, comforting them not∣withstanding the evill they had done unto him, and commanding them in hast to car∣rie his father the tydings of his prosperity, and to bring him into Egipt unto him; together with the tokens (which Joseph gave his brethren) of his love and naturall affection towards them▪ to vers 16. Se∣condly,  the report of this in Pharaoh's court, and howe acceptable it was to the King; together with the command of Pharaoh concerning Jacob and his fami∣lie, or rather his confirmation of that which Joseph had before commanded concerning them. to vers 21. Thirdly,  and lastly, Joseph's furnishing of his bre∣theren for the journey with change of apparrell and other necessaries both for them selves and their father in great aboundance; their returne to their father with the tydings, and the amazement which Jacob was in at the first hearing of it, but at length (seing the plaine and evi∣dent proofes and tokens of the truth the∣reof) the great joy wherewith he was taken, and resolution to goe and see his son Joseph before his death. to the end of the chapter. In which example of
Jacob we may see a fulfilling of that common proverb, Parting is a pain, but meeting is a joy againe. In the first of these generall parts, weThe first gene∣rall part di∣vided. may observe, first the manner how Ioseph made himself knowen unto his bretheren  vers 1. 2. 3. 4. Secondly, the comfort &  consolation which he giveth unto his bre∣theren, being astonished at his presence Vers 5. 6. 7. 8. from which my purpose is by God's direction and assistance to speake some what, and so conclude. In the consideration whereof, I can∣notThe second particular of the first gene∣rall part, handled. without admiration behold with what vertue, modestie humanity meek∣nesse, and godlinesse, Ioseph doth handle with his brethren. For first he doth not adde affliction to the afflicted but seing them in great feare and astonishment (partly becaus they saw now (contrary toVers 5. 6. 7. 8. their expectation) Ioseph to be a prince, whom of late they thought either to be deceased and perished from off the earth, or to be a poore and meane bondslave or servant; and partly becaus of the guilti∣nesse of their consciences for the sin which they had committed, being also ashamed▪ to looke upon their brother, whome they
had so cruelly intreated; and also becaus they feared (doubtlesse) least he would now at length avenge the injuries and re∣proches which they had offered him, (in calling him a dreamer, despising his vi∣sions, and selling him to the Midianites, yea indeed hating of him) and would de∣stroy them all according to their just de∣merites, he laboureth to uphold them, and comfort them, least they should be swal∣lowed up of over much heavinesse. Secondly, he doth not insult over them  (they being guilty and he innocent) with threatenings of revenge, as is the custome and practise of wicked and ungodly men, or with taunts and checks of rebuke, be∣caus of the greatnesse of his suffering at their hands, as the manner of some is that would seeme righteous, when their brother hath sinned to lay strong and hea∣vy loades and aggravations of sin upon him: but useth arguments to them to take away their feare, and freely manifesteth his pardoning of the injurie done unto him, in effect, though not so largely as afterwards he doth, Cap. 50: 19. Third∣ly,  neither doth he rejector despise them (being poore and in distresse, and he a
man of great place and dignitie) but calleth them to him vers 4. and acknowledgeth them to be his bretheren; and further ac∣knowledgeth it to be the worke of God to make him a father to Pharaoh, and Lord of the land of Egypt vers 1. and there∣fore is as much as if he had said, that it was not for him to be proud or lifted up in his place, seing the same God who had exal∣ted him, could cast him dwne againe. So that the wordes of these foure ver∣ses, offer to our consideration, first the  wordes of comfort which Ioseph giveth to his bretheren. Vers. 5. Secondly,  the argument which he useth to move them thereunto, taken from the worke of God's providence, who had directed and over ruled their wicked purpose and practise to a good end, even the preser∣vation of their lives, and posterity by a great deliverance: whereupon Ioseph doth insist at large, and in his reasoning doth no lesse than thrice affirme that God had brought him into Egypt and not they▪ The which in it's proper place we shal consider of. From Ioseph's comfortable speaking to his bretheren in this their feare and asto∣nishment,
we may learne, first, this gene∣rall1 Doctrine▪ In time of heavines bre∣theren ought to comfort one an other. note of instruction, namely; That it is the dutie of Christian bretheren to com∣fort one an other in the time of affliction and sorrowe. This is proved even by the practise of the three friendes of Job, who when they heard of all the evill which was come upon him, they Iob 2: 11. came every man from his owne place &c. for they had made appointment together to come to mourne with him and to comfort him. Though afterwardes they proved mise∣rable comforters: yet their intent at first seemeth to be good; for man in miserie Iob 6: 14▪ should be comforted of his neighbour. The prophet Jeremie maketh this plaine to us in that he himself breaking forth into that bitter lamentation of Ierusalem, maketh it one of his first complaints concerning her, that among Lam. 1: 2. all her lo∣vers she hath none to comfort her, all her freinds have dealt treacherously with her, they are become her enemyes. It was the care of the Apostle Paul (becaus of the maniefold afflictions which accompanie the gospell) in all his epistles to 2 Cor. 13: 11. comfort the churches. And therfore it was, that e sent Timotheus that faithfull 1 Thes. 3: 2. brother
and minister of the gospell of Christ, unto the church at Thessolonica even to establish them, and to comfort them concerning their faith. And there is good reason for it; for1 Reason. first, they are members of one body, even that mysticall body whereof Christ is the head. Now we know in the naturall body, how ready the one member is to help and comfort the other; yea should▪ this mutuall succour be withdrawen, ac∣cording to the course of nature the de∣struction of the body must needs followe. Is it thus in the naturall? much more should there be in the Spirituall and 1 Cor. 12: 25. su∣pernaturall, a readinesse and willingnesse in every necessity & affliction, each mem∣ber to helpe and succour the other. Yea Christ Jesus our head taketh it as done to Math. 25: 40. himselfe whatsoeuer comfort or helpe is administred to his distressed members▪ and though it be but a Math. 10: 42. cup of cold water if it be given to a disciple in the name of  disciple (or becaus he belongs to Christ) it shall not be unrewarded. Secondly, we are liable and subject2 Reason. our selves to distresse and sorrow, and in such cases (I know) there is none bu
would gladly receave comfort from others: therfore as we would that men Mat. 7: 12▪ should doe to us, so must we doe to others. And if we comfort not others in their di∣stresse, with what face can we expect con∣solation from others when we stand in need. Yea the Apostle Paul confesseth that it was one end wherfore he was com∣forted of the Lord 2 Cor. 1: 4. the father of mercyes, in all his tribulation, that he might be able to comfort them which are in any trouble by the comfort wherewith he himself was com∣forted of God. Thirdly, God hath required t of us by3 Reason. his lawe which saith Math. 22: 39. thou shalt love thy neighbour as thy self; and comfort Isa. 40: 1. ye, comfort ye my people, saith the Lord. Yea Christ hath commanded us to Mat. 5: 44. love our enemies, and to doe good to those that per∣secute us: much more then to our brethe∣ren. And indeed it is the end wherfore we are so neerely united in one and the same fellowship of the gospell, that we may edifie exhort, and comfort one another according to the ability which God hath given; that he in all thinges may have the glorie. This serveth therfore to reprove first,1 Vse. Of reproofe.
the great neglect which is even among God's people themselves of this brotherly fellowship, in comforting one another in time of distresse. Wee maie many times heare of the sicknesse, poverty, griefe and affliction of our poore bretheren, or sisters; but there is little paines taken in visiting, them. If they be rich or such as we espe∣tially respect, then runne and ride, goe and come, early and late, for and unto them; but the poore in their adversity are too too much neglected. Wee visit them when we have leasure, or little else to doe. I am sure, if my finger doe ake or grieve me, or my toe be sore, I am pre∣sently taking care to apply some help or comfort to it; and I thinke it is so with others: oh! that the like care could be shewed to the poore members of Christ, as is to the members of our naturall bodie. But this is that which our blessed Saviour hath foretold, that Maoh. 24: 12. becaus iniquity shall abound the love of many shall waxe cold: whereas pure f religion, and undefyledIam. 1: 27. before God, and the father, is this, to visite the fatherlesse and widowes in their affliction, &c. For howe can it be said of us, or we be sure of our selves, that we
1 Iohn 4: 20. love God whom we have not seen, if we love not our brother whom we have seene, though never so meane and lowe in out∣ward estate, and how can we be said to love him, whom we doe not visit and comfort as much as we can in time of di∣stresse? for then is the time espetially of manifesting our love according to that common saying, A friend in need is a friend indeed, or A sure friend is tryed in a doubtfull matter. Secondly, they come here also justly to  be reproved that in stead of comfort in adversity, doe administer discomfort and cause of heavines unto the poore afflicted. If they heare of a brother or sister to have any thing befallen them, they bethinke presently of some wrong and evill con∣struction of the cause of their suffering; & if they come to visite them, either through ignorance they are unable to speake comfortablie to them, or els by reason of a prejudicate opinion wherewith they are carryed away (like Job's three freinds) they increase the sorrow of the afflicted by their tantings and unjust or sensorious reproofes. But let those that feare the Lord be2 Vse. Of exhorta∣tion.
hence exhorted to put on bowels of Colos. 3: 12. compassion, tender mercy, and loving kindnesse, to pitie those that are in af∣fliction; remembering that in all feares, distresses and distractions of our brethe∣ren, we should have a fellow feeling with them, and be of like affections as if we our selves were afflicted; according to the exhortation of the Apostle who saith Heb. 13: 3. Remember them that are in bonds, as bound with them; and them that suffer ad∣versity, as being your selves also (as indeed we are) in the body. And if we be our selves in the body with them, how can anie member suffer, and we not be trou∣bled? how can any be grieved, and we rejoyce? Oh! that we could but call to mynd that woe and destruction, which is denounced against Obad. vrs 10: 11. 12. Edom becaus sh looked on the day of her brother, in th day that he became a stranger, and rejoy¦ced over the children of Judah in the da of their destruction, and looked on thei affliction in the day of their calamitie &c▪ Such is the portion of God's people man times from the Almighty (as it was of D¦vid) that they looke for some Psal. 69: 20. to pitie b there are none; and for comforters but th
find none. But let us take heed how we withdraw (in the time of need) from suc∣couring the poore oppressed least we be found like the deceit full waters, which in the Iob 6: 16. winter are black with ice, and where∣in the snow is hid; but when the heat cometh they are dryed up and afford no refresh∣ment to the wearyed travailer. And that we may be incouraged hereunto let us have in our thoughts that comfortable speech of the prophet David, saying, Psal. 41: 1. 2. &c. Blessed is he that considereth (or pru∣dently judgeth of) the poore afflicted; the Lord will deliver him in the time of trouble. The Lord will preserve him, and keep him alive, and he shalbe blessed upon earth; and thou wilt not deliver him to the will of his enemies. The Lord will strengthen him upon the bed of languishing; thou wilt make all his bed in his sicknesse. Whereas (on the other hand) those that neglect the poore members of Christ in their adver∣sitie, shall heare that dolefull sentence at the last day pronounced against them by our Lord Christ the Iudge of quick and dead, saying Math. 25: 41. Goe ye cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the Devill, and his An∣gels: for I was an hungry and ye gave m
no meat, thirsty and ye gave me no drinke, naked and ye clothed me not sick and in pri∣son and ye visited me not; in as much as they have not done it to his members in their necessity. For certainly saith the Apostle James, Iaw. 2: 13. he shall have judgement without mercy, that hath shewed no mercy. Furthermore, in that Ioseph doth not here avenge the wrong done unto him by his bretheren, but speaketh kindly af∣fectioned towards them; we also learne; That it is the duty of God's children, not2 Doctrine. God's child∣ren may not avenge them∣selves. to avenge any wrong done unto them by their bretheren (or others) but rather to doe them good for the same. Thus did our Saviour Christ, who was innocent and harmlesse, yet persecured and tormented by the Iewes, and at length by their ma∣lice and envy brought unto death; not∣withstanding all which he prayeth for them, and that in the midst of his tor∣ments; saying; Luke 23: 34. father, forgive them; for they know not what they doe. The like did that faithfull servant of Christ and Martyre Stephen, when his enemyes were stoning of him, he kneeled downe, and cryed with a lowd voice saying, Acts. 7: 60. Lor lay not this sin to their charge. This was
that wherein the Kingly prophet rejoy∣ced himself, in the time of danger and trouble, that he was so farre from rewar∣ding evill to him that was at peace with him (as his enemyes did to him) that he Psal. 7: 4. had delivered him who without cause was his enemie. Thus did Moses and Aaron behave themselves toward the King of Egypt; notwithstanding Pharaoh dealt so cruellie with them, & did even mocke with the plagues of God; yet Moses prayed for him upon his request. So did the same servant of God Moses unto Miriam his sister when she had spoken comtemptuously against him; he seemeth not to seeke the least recompence but meekly beareth it, and when the Lord gave testimony on his part by plaguing her, he earnestly beseecheth the Lord to Nomb. 12: 1. 2. 3. 13. heale her. Job also that patterne of patience though his three friendes had so reprochfullie handled him in the time of his adversity, judging him thereby no other but an ungodly man, and a wicked oppressour: yet when his prosperitie came againe and God had justified his cause against them, Iob 42: 9. 10. he offered their sacrifice to the Lord for their trespasse
and prayed for them. And it is that which the blessed Apostle in plaine termes ex∣horteth unto saying, Rom. 12: 21. Be not overcome of evill, but overcome evill with good. Should we not doe so; but (on the1 Reason. other hand) seeke revenge of injuries and wrong done unto us; then we should assume to our selves the place of God: for vengeance belongeth unto him, and he hath said he will repay it. Psal. 94: 1. Heb. 10: 30. Therfore, for us to seeke to repaie it, were to step a staire too high; yea (if I may so speake) to take the office out of God's hand, as if he were either not able, or els not worthy to avenge our quarrell. Secondly, by doeing good for evill,2 Reason. we shew our selves to be children of our heavenly father, who Mat. 5: 45. maketh his sun to rise on the evill, and on the good; and sendeth raine on the just, and on the unjust. But marke what our Saviour Christ saith; If ye Luke. 6: 32. 33. 34. 35. love them which love you, wha thanke have ye? for sinners also love thos that love them. And if ye doe good to the which doe good to you, what thanke have ye for sinners also doe even the same. And i ye lend to them of whom ye hope to receave▪
what thanke have ye? for sinners also lend to sinners, to receive as much againe. But love ye your enemies, and doe good and lend, hoping for no thing againe; and your reward shalbe great, and ye shalbe the children of the highest: for he is kind unto the unthank∣full, and to the evill. Thirdly, otherwise we can not say truly3 Reason. that we forgive them from our heart, if we doe not also forbeare all desire of re∣venge; yea if we doe not doe good to them, if it lyeth in our power. As a man can not be said truly to eschew or avoid the evill, unlesse he doe the contrarie good: So a man can not truly be said to forgive the trespasse done to him, if he doe not seeke the good of him that hath wronged him so well after, as before he did him the injurie. This may serve in the first place to re∣prove1 Vse. Of reproofe. and condemne all secret revenge whatsoever; as namely, when a man, though he seemeth to be satisfied by his brother for the wrong or offence done him, and hath with his mouth pronounced him pardoned, yea, and given him his hand on it: yet (such is the hypocrisie and falsenesse of many mens hearts) it stic∣keth
still in his stomach; and he seeketh by all secret and close wayes and meanes that may be, to sit on his skirts, or to fit him a pennie worth, as we use to say in our common speech; and so by some in∣direct course or other to doe him harme. This is a corruption or fault which is often in too many, and hard it is to be dri∣ven out; so difficult is it to flesh and blood to have a good estimation of, or to wish well from the heart to one that hath for∣merly offended us, though for shame we could not but make a shew of forgive∣nesse and contentednesse, when the offen∣ding partie manifested repentance and sorrowe for his sin. But God Almighty dealeth otherwise with us; for though we have never so grievously or haynously rebelled against his lawe, and offended his sacred Majestie: yet if we come with true contrition of heart, and confesse our sin to him, he forgiveth us our transgression, and accepteth us in Christ as much into his fa∣vour as if we had never sinned, and ceaseth not to doe us good continually, if we pro∣voke him not againe. And thus must w also labour to behave our selves toward others and to take heed that we doe no
approve of such an infectious companion, or nurse such a biting, yea (I may say) devouring serpent, as envy: for Iob 5▪ 2. envy slayeth the ydiot, and wrath killeth the foolish man, saith the scripture. And where∣soeuer this sin beareth sway, there it is plaine the Divell raigneth who is in scripture called  Mat. 13: 28. the envyous man. And if secret, then much more open and pro∣fessed revenge cometh plainly here to be touched by way of reprehension: when men have no sooner an offence done unto them, but straitwaies their wits are at worke, what they shall doe to avenge their wrong. Such are those whom the Apostle reproveth, who goe to 1 Cor. 6: 6. lawe with their brethren, and that before unbeleeuers rather than passe by a wrong. This is (as is also the other secretly) an apparant giving place to the Divell, which ought not to be; but we should rather (as the same Apostle sheweth) be willing to 1 Cor. 6: 7. take wrong and suffer our sel∣ves to be defrauded; and consider with our selves whither we have not at some time or other done wrong to others, and now t pleaseth God to suffer the like to full pon our owne pates; and so make a good
and holy use of it as David did of 2 Sam. 16: 5. Shi∣mei's cursing him. To which purpose suiteth well the counsell of the preacher saying, Eccles. 7: 21. 22. Take no heed unto all wordes that are spoken, lest thou heare they servant curse thee. For often times also thine owne heart knoweth that thou thy self likewise hast cursed others. If we could or would doe but this, I doubt not but we might many times find a remedy against avenging our sel∣ves, and we should be called also thereby to the consideration of our owne wayes, and amendement of life. In the next place, let it serve to exhort2 Vse. Of exhoria∣tion. us to be pitifull and tender hearted to∣wardes our brethren, and consider after this sort; hath my brother done wrong? it is indeed his fault, and this is all our corruption and weaknesse, and I my self am proue to the like infirmitie, I know not how soone I may be tempted to the like sin. And having thus considered, pitie him, lovingly admonish him, praie for him, and in praying for him remember thy selfe also, that thou majest be kept from the like evill. Consider what the scripture saith, Acts. 20: 35. it is a more blessed thing to give than to receave: So it is farre bet∣ter
to suffer wrong, than to doe any, or to seeke vengeance. What greater wrong could be offered to a person, than to con∣spire against his life, and to make him awaie, as the sons of Jacob did to Joseph? yet behold Joseph's compassion is such towards them, that he doth not seeke re∣venge, but rather administreth comfort to them. And this bringeth me upon the consideration of the wordes of his com∣fort, which are as followeth. GrieveVers 5: not, neither be angrie with your selfs that you sold me hither. The which wordes may seeme to have their interpretation a part, for the Origi∣nall text saith in the latter part of the sen∣tence, Heb. veal jichar be∣gneine∣kem. neither let anger (or displeasure) be in your ejes, which the greeke rendereth, let it not seeme hard unto you: as if Jo∣seph did exhort them in the former part, not to he sorrie and troubled over much every man of them in himself for that they had done; and in the latter part that they should not be angrie one at an other, as one that was more unwilling, or more sparing or backward in the thing, accu∣sing him that was more forward for the same, and so falling out (as it were) into
anger about it; for anger that appeareth in the Gen. 4: 5. face is commonly exercised towards others. For we see by common expe∣rience that anger conceaved or boiling against a mans selfe is commonly more depressed, than to shew it selfe so openly, becaus men have by nature a greater love to themselves: but when a man is sud∣dainlie moved by an other, his blood will rise against him. To which purpose (me thinkes) tendeth that exhortation of Joseph to his brethren, saying See that ye fall not out by the way. Yet I find CharahHeb. Charah. (whence cometh Char in the text (tran∣slated anger) to be indefinitely used for any burning or inflammation either with anger or griefe (sometime other af∣fections) occasioned by a mans selfe or some other; Wherefore though this I conceave may be noted in the interpre∣tation of this text becaus of the Heb▪ phrase: yet I desire none te receave more for truth than what they have good rea∣son alleadged for it. So then the wordes lye thus, Grieve not, or be not ye grieved, or els be not af∣fected or overtaken with griefe or anger or such like passions of the mynd that &c.
as if he had said, let it not so sorely trouble ou and grieve you, and be not so much iscontented, neither cast downe your ountenances, or afflict your heartes, be∣aus you have done this thing. Where∣ we must take heed that we doe not un∣erstand, that Joseph doth absolutly or holie forbid them to grieve for the sin hich they had committed against him for that would not have bin a good eech, seing everie offence or injurie nto man is a sin against God, and ther∣re to be sorrowed for after a godly rt) but Joseph having seen already how uch they were smittē in their conscien∣es, Gen. 44: 16. VVith Cap. 42: 21. and troubled for the same (as ap∣eareth by their many times confessing of e same in effect) and now also percea∣ing that they were struckē with feare, & mazement, for the same, he laboureth to mfort them by dehorting thē from too uch grieving, fearing least they should e swallowed up of over much heavinesse, t consider rather the providence of od in bringing him thither for their pre∣rvation. He would (as a learned manAynsvv. in locum. serveth) have them moderate the sor∣we for their sin with consideration of
God's providence which turned it unto good. So that from this carriage of Jo∣seph to his bretheren, this note ariseth for3 Doctrine vvhen men are in some good measure humbled by sorrovv for sin; their sor∣rovv ought by others to be mitigated. our instruction: That when we see men in some good measure already humbled, and terrified for their sin, we must take heed that we doe not increase their sor∣rowe and griefe; but rather labour to com∣fort them, and so to mitigate it. It is the portion which the Lord gave unto Jeru∣salem, that after she had receaved the chastisement of her iniquitie, she should be Isae. 40: 1. comforted. And it is noted of ou Lord and head Christ Jesus to whom w ought to conform, that he Isa. 42: 3. breaketh not  bruised reed neither doth he quench th smoaking flaxe. For first, it is not th1 Reason. quantity of sorrowe and griefe whic God regardeth (though indeed great si require great sorrow and humiliation) bu the sincerity and truth of the same. If  be godly l sorrowe, such as bringeth repe¦tance2 Cor. 7: 10. never to be repented of (though it b but one teare though it be but one sigh,  it be from the bottome of the soule, wi a wounded and broken heart, with a tr sence of sin) this is such a Psal. 51: 17. sacrifice as h will no way refuse.
Secondly, we shall find that the Lord2 Reason. doth pronounce pardon even upon the first acknowledgement of sin. As we may see in that pregnant example of Da∣vid who (though he had committed those great sins, adultery and murder, yet) no sooner did he acknowledge his fault, saying, 2 Sam. 12: 13. I have sinned against the Lord; but the prophet made answere to him, saying, and the Lord hath put away thy sin thou shalt not dye. So also may be instanced of the thiefe upon the crosse who (doubtlesse) was a great malefactour; yet acknowledging the innocency of Christ, and his owne guiltinesse, & begging favour & mercy at his hand saying, Luke 23: 43. Lord remember me when thou comest into thy Kingdome; heard straitwaie this comfortable answere from his sweet Saviour, This day shalt thou be with me in paradise. Yea God hath pro∣mised, that at what time soeuer a sinner loth repent from the bottome of his eart, he will blott out all his transgres∣ions and his iniquities he will remember o more. Nowe should we tith repen∣ance, and exact this and that quantity of orrowe (as the papists doe proportion
their penance to so many pater nosters, so many stroakes on the breast, crosses, and masses, to so many precessions to this or that holy place bare foot &c.) Wee should exact more than God himselfe, and therein shew as if we would be more wise than God, or more just than our maker, which is high presumption in us. But if we wilbe the children of our heavenly father and like unto him, we must Luke 6: 31. be mercifull as he his mercifull. Thirdly, over much or immoderate3 Reason. sorrowe is a great meanes to bring men to desparation, which we should labour as much as may be to prevent, being mynd∣full of the counsell of the blessed Apostle to the church at Corinth concerning the incestuous person, who had bin a great of∣fender, yet the Apostle saith of him, 2 Cor. 2: 6. 7. 8. Suf∣fitient to such a man is this punishment which is inflicted of many; So that contrary wise yee ought rather to forgive him, a comfort him, least perhaps such a one shou be swallowed up with over much sorrow Wherfore I beseech you that you would co¦firme your love towardes him. The consideration whereof can not b1 Vse. serve to condemne the extreame rigo
and foolish zeale of some men; who be∣cause they would be thought holie men, and just in their lives, when an other man hath sinned and his sin be shewed unto him by any meanes, though he be strucken with feare and astonishment, yea doe in plaine termes acknowledge his sin; yet becaus he doth it not in these or these ter∣mes, becaus he doth not come to this or hat circumstance which they aime at, or espetially minde; therfore his repentance s not allowed of, they will have none of t. It is good that such zealots weigh ell what the Psalmist saith, Psa. 130: 3. If thou ord be extreame to marke what is done misse, who shalbe able to abide it? If the ord enter into Psa. 143: 2. Judgment no flesh li∣ing can be justifyed in his sight. Such men as are thus bestraitened in eir bowels of compassion, doe not surely nsider how manie sins the Lord passeth  in them which they never had so much once the sight of, or ever made one ord of confession of; nay (may I not goe ther?) many sins which they have rough their ignorance) stood to main∣ne as holy and good actions; and yet y will be thus exacting upon their
bretheren. Such men as these (whoso ever or where so ever they be) I shall say no more to or of them at the present, but earnestly beseech thē well to take notice of that example of the servant to whom Mnth. 18. Chap. vers 28. to she end. his master forgave ten thousand talents but he would not forbeare his fellow ser∣vant an hundred pence, but cast him into prison till he should pay him all the debt and let them take heed the like be no their portion as was his: for he Iam. 2: 13. shall ha Iudgment (saith the Apostle) with mercie that hath shewed no mercy, a mercie rejoyceth against judgement. A2 Vse. for our owne parts, I desire that t example of Joseph, and the doctri thence deduced, may take so much imp¦sion in us, that we may shew our rea¦nesse to receave penitent sinners, and sh mercie to them as God sheweth mercy▪ us; and be so farre from adding to  griefe and sorrowe of the afflicted, as  we doe rather labour to comfort them  ease their affliction and mitigate t griefe. Let us not be Iob 16: 2. miserable  forters like the friendes of Job; no those of whom the prophet David  plaineth Psa. 69: 26. that persecute him whom
Lord hath smitten, and talke to their griefe whom he hath wounded: but let us be like the good Samaritane, ready with Luke 10: 33. 34. oile & wine to comfort and refresh wounded Spirits, knowing that wee our selves may also be tempted. For God sent me before you to preserve life, or for preservation of life, or for life, or for vivification, which is some what nearer the Heb. text, understanding the rest. This is the reason or argument which Joseph useth to perswade his rethren to be comforted in this their erplexity. Wherein he adviseth them ot so much to stand looking upon their wne basenesse and corruption, as to be∣old the over ruling hand of God who ath (out of their evill purpose & devises) rought so much good to their brother, hem selves, and their aged father; yea heir whole family. In these wordes is conteyned the somme nd substance of all that followeth in e three subsequent verses, they being ut as it were an exposition (or laying ut more largelie) of this reason in the verall branches thereof; and out of hich there may seeme to arise some
objections worthy the clearing, before we proceed further; as namely first, how  Joseph could say or whence he knew that God sent him before them into Egipt to preserve their lives, seing he could not be ignorant of this, that it was by the malice and wickednesse of his brethren that he was sent away as a slave being sold to the Midianites? For answere hereunto many  thinges might be alleadged, as first, by the light of nature, the sparkes whereof con∣cerning God and his providence remaine in the myndes of men after the fall; and in some are more clearly perceaved than in others, as we may observe by the wri∣tings of many heathenish Philosophers and poets even to this day, who by the light of nature alone acknowledge manie excellent thinges concerning the provi∣dence of God. Secondly, by the doctrine of the church of God or the common faith and godlinesse: for Joseph was well in∣structed in the faith and religion of God' people in his fathers family. And there¦in we know (and can not otherwise con¦ceave but) that the knowledge of God  and his providence in creating and go¦verning the world and all actions an
things in the same to the glory of his name, and salvation of his elect, was a spetiall point wherein they must of neces∣sity be informed. By this faith and know∣ledge it might come to passe (as it doth to us at this day in the like case) that Io∣seph knew that he was sent of God into Egypt, that his brethren and the Midia∣nites were the instruments of God in this worke; but the evill which his bretheren both thought and intended, yea and did (as much as in them was) commit, that God by his divine wisdome and good∣nesse turned both to his and their good. This faith and knowledge is the first rise or step of godlinesse and comfort, but the ignorance of this doctrine is the high way to error prophanenesse and desparation. In this knowledge it was that Iob saith concerning his goodes and substance ta∣ken away by the Divell and those thee∣vish Sabeans and Chaldeans, Iob. 1. The Lord giveth and the Lord taketh &c. By the same the Apostles and brethren acknow∣ledge that Acts. 4: 27. 2. Herod and Pontius Pilate with the gentiles and the people of Israel did against Iesus none other but what God's hand and his counsell determined before to
be done. And in an other place, that he was delivered Acts. 2: 23. by the determinate counsell and foreknowledge of God. It might be further conceaved that he might know it by the revelation of the Spirit, as well as the yeares of famine, and the time how long they should continue. But it may be more apparantly and probably alled∣ged for answere, that he perceaved and knew it by the event and issue of the mat∣ter it selfe, which did plainly declare thus much. For he knew well enough that the intent of his brethren was nought els but mischeife and evill to him, and not the least desire of preferment, but rather subjection and enslaving of Ioseph: and now he saw that it was other wise come to passe, his dreames were in part fulfilled, it was better befallen him than they in∣tended, he had already given them come for their supply, and now was able to en∣tertaine his bretheren like a prince; to whom should he then ascribe this but to the Lord? By faith we believe the pro∣vidence of God that it shalbe in and ove all thinges to order and dispose them a he pleaseth; but when, and where, and i what manner wee know not untill th
thing be brought about, then we see an absolute performance of the thing before us. For Heb. 11: 1. faith is the evidence of things not seene. but when we have that which with confidence we hoped for, then we believe that particuler to come no lon∣ger, for we have it in performance; ther∣fore now we conclude that it is so and so come to passe by the providence of God. Thus Ioseph here concludeth by the event of this plot against him, that God had sent him into Egypt. And thus we may safely and without danger conclude upon the like perillous cases, when we see that they turne to our good, that it is the Lord that hath sent this or that mea∣nes unto us whereby we attaine therunto through God's over ruling of it. And thus much in effectour Saviour teacheth Joh. 16: 4. and 13: 7. An other objection  ariseth hence, to wit, whither Ioseph (saying that God sent him hither, & after∣wards vers 8. not you but God &c.) doth nor seeme to make God the author of the sin committed by his brethren? To  which I answere, No, in no wise; for his brethren intended no thing lesse than the sending of him into Egypt to preserve
their lives: and therfore when they sold him they did not say, come let us send him into Egypt by the Midianitish merchants, that he may there provide for us in time of dearth; Gen. 37: 27 but comelet us sell him to the Ismae∣lites, not caring what they did with him whither carry him into Egypt & sell him there, or keepe him to thē selves as a bond slave and servant; all was one to them so they were freed of him, and might heare no more of his dreames, nor have him any longer eye sore to them. This was the wicked worke of his brethren, but the bringing of him into Egypt & there pre∣ferring him to this great dignitie, that was the worke of God himselfe, as Ioseph here truly confesseth. To the bringing to passe wherof God doth no lesse justly and holylie make use of the wickednesse of Ioseph's brethren, and the Midianites, than he did the wickednesse of the thee∣ves and Satan in trying Iob, and of Iudas and the people to redeeme mankind by the death of his sonne. In this Ioseph teacheth us how in the like events we should judge and discerne betweene the worke of God and the sin of men. The bretheren sin; 1: becaus they doe a thing
absolutlie unlawfull. 2. they did it with wicked affections, and to an evill end; to wit, in hatred to, and for the ca∣sting away of their brother. But God doth that which is most holy; first by a secret motion he moveth the Midianites to bring him into Egypt, & not els where. 2. he did it for a good end, namely to preserve life. But God neither intended, nor approved the sin in their action; but suffered it to goe along with his must just and gratious worke, that of his admirable wisdome and goodnesse he might (as it were) bring light out of darknesse. Further it may be objected, whither this  speech of Ioseph doth not seeme to absol∣ve his bretheren of sin, and make them guiltlesse, seing it was the will and worke of God to bring Ioseph into Egypt? I  answere, No: for there are two thinges necessarily required of those that doe that which God willeth, & to make thēselves free of condemnation of guiltinesse, with∣out which they can no wise be excused before God or men. First that the action be commanded of God, and doe agree with his revealed will, which is the only rule of righteousnesse for us, whereby we
are to knowe what to doe, and what to leave undone. Secondly, that it be done in faith, and with a desire of obedience to God's will certainly made knowen to us. But neither of these can be said to be here in this act: for the lawe of God is so farre from commanding the selling of a brother for a bond servant, that it wholly forbid∣det it, and that not only in one but seve∣rall commandements. Neither did they doe it with desire to please God, but to fulfill their malice hatred and evill wills against their harmlesse and innocent bro∣ther. Therefore in either respects they grievously sinned. In that Joseph here (having bin by the malice of his brethrē sold to the Midiani∣tes and by them brought into Egypt, and there through the malice and evill af∣fection of his mistresse imprisoned and kept in great bondage and affliction: and being now at length raised to dignity there) acknowledgeth it to be the worke4 Doctrine. God's provi∣dence in all estates of men ought by them to be espeially mynded and acknovv∣ledged. of God that brought him thither; we may gather hence to our selves this lesson. That in every estate and condition which doth befall us in this life, whither prospe∣ritie or adversitie, we must not principally
respect the instruments by which the sa∣me is wrought or brought to passe: but looke upon the providence of God who disposeth all thinges according to his pur∣pose and will. Thus doth David behave himselfe in the case of Shimei, when he cursed him; he looked not so much upon the sin of Shimei, as upon the Lord without whose providence and permis∣sion he could not have done it. 2 Sam. 16: 10. Becaus (saith he) the Lord hath said unto him, curse David; who shall then saie wherfore hast thou done it? Thus the Lord himself testifieth concerning the affliction of his people by the Assyrians, that it was not they principally, but the Lord (by them) that afflicted Israel. Isa. 10: 5. 6. O Assyrian, the rod of myne anger and the staffe in their hand is myne indignation. I will send him against an hypocriticall nation, and against the people of my wrath will I give him a charge, &c. how be it the Assyrian meant no such thing as to be God's instrument to cor∣rect, but his owne servant to spoile and ruinate the people of God, to enrich him∣self. The like wereof we may see in respect of adversitie in many other pla∣ces. And as for prosperity, this is noe
wise doubted amongst the people of God; they have alwaies acknowledged the hand and providence of God towards them. Psa. 31: 15. My times are in thyne hand, saith David in one psalme. And in an∣other, Psa. 16: 5. The Lord is the portion of myne inheritance, and of my cup, thou maintainest my lot. The which Solomon also plain∣ly teacheth, saying, Prov. 16: 33. The lot is cast into the lap: but the whole disposing thereof is of the Lord. And the prophet Daniel testi∣fieth, that Dan. 2: 21. he changeth the times and the seasons: he removeth Kinges, and setteth up Kinges: he giveth wisdome unto the wise, and knowledge to them that know under∣standing. The which Abrahams servant also acknowledgeth in the good successe he had in Gen. 24: 27. seeking a wife for his masters sonne. There is also good reason for it, for1 Reasn. first, he is the Creator maker and preser∣ver of all thinges both in heaven and earth; and as the Apostle saith, Rom. 11: 36. of him by him and for him are all things, Col. 1: 6. and in him all thinges consist. In him it is that we live move and have our being, Acts. 17: 28. There is no creature visible or invisible Angel or Spirit, that can doe any thing
without him, as saith the prophet, Lam. 3: 37. who is he that saith and it cometh to passe, when the Lord commandeth it not? It is he that sendeth affliction, it is he also that giveth prosperitie; for he testifieth of him selfe saying, Isa. 45: 7. I forme the light, and I create darknesse: I make peace, and create evill: I the Lord doe all these thinges. Good reason therfore that whatsoeuer doth be∣fall us; we looke unto the hand of God, and acknowledge it therein. Secondly, God's eye is over everie2 Reason. thing in the earth, and 2 Cron. 16: 9. it runneth to and fro throughout the whole world &c. Iob 28: 24. VVith Iob 34: 21. He looketh to the ends of the earth, and seeth under the whole heavens: to make the weight for the wyndes, and he weigheth the waters by measure: and we know that he is of power suffitient to hinder any thing from coming to passe if he pleaseth (the very Divels themselves can not rage or raise any stirre without his permission) therfore we can not but conclude that whatsoever cometh to passe is by his providence, which ought therfore prin∣cipally to be respected. Furthermore,3 Reason. our Saviour Christ himself teacheth us, that Mat. 10: 30. the verie haires of our head are all
nombred as it were in the booke of God, and not one of them shall perish without him; it must needes followe then, that no thing can befall us without his provi∣dence. Therfore not so much regard the meanes and instruments whereby it cometh to passe as he that over ruleth and disposeth all thinges. Fourthly, our4 Reason. God is one only; wherfore it agreeth to his divine nature that all thinges in heaven and earth should be at his disposing, either to suffer or hinder to doe or not to doe. For should it not be thus, the order5 Reason. of all thinges would soone be overthro∣wen: for Satan is so full of malice agains mankind, and our corrupt nature is so per∣verse and wicked; that were it not re∣strayned and kept under by the provi∣dence and power of God, all thinge would goe amisse and soone come to decaie. But becaus God Almighty hath set a decree beyond which no thing shal passe, and he doth worke continuallie i the effecting of what he hath purposed therfore it cometh to passe that a thinges are governed, and guided so, a that thereby cometh glory to his own holy name, and salvation to his elect.
This point serveth to condemne the1 Vse. generall foolishnesse and ignorance of the world that set before their eyes a wrong cause in the good or evill that befalleth them. Some say, if it be evill, it was their mishappe, and what an unluckie thing was this? yea some people are so prophane that when any thing befalleth them crosse & contrary to their expecta∣tion, they will curse all ill luck and bad fortune: and on the other hand, if thinges goe well, then it was by chance and they had good fortune &c. And thus the fooles bolt is soone shot, they speake like blind men of that whereof if they be asked what it is, or who made this fortune, of what substance, shape, fashion, or con∣dition it is, they can not give an answere, or shew any reason for what they speake. Thus they behave themselves like meere Atheists as if they thought in their harts (as their conversation doth too plainly te∣stifie) that there were not a God that jud∣geth the Earth. Others there are that receaving good thinges, they looke upon the instrument by which it cometh to them, but not upon the effitient or prime mover; as doe
the heathenish Idolaters who worship the sun becaus of the heate and benefit they receave by it, and the glorious beauty of it, and so the moone and the starres &c. (Yea every thing that they receave they have some Idol or other which they worship from whome they thinke it co∣meth, as their gods of wine, warre, love &c.) not to speake of the meane and dead creatures which some worship as garlicke, onions, &c. Yea and many others that make a shew of having the knowledge of the only true God, who doe not looke unto his hand in disposing of their affaires, but looke unto their owne labours, ascribing the praise Hab. 1: 16. unto their nets and sacrificing to their yarne, thinking that Deut. 8: 17. their owne handes have gotten them their substance. It is true indeed, that it is the diligent hand that maketh rich, Prov. 10: 4. but not without the blessing of God, it is he that addeth no sorrowe with it. Vers 22. Others there are that when they are persecuted, afflicted, im∣prisoned, or any wise troubled with ene∣mies, plague, famine &c. They looke upon the outward cause, as the malice of their adversaries, this or that infection, o
this bad yeare of corne, and such and such extortioners and regrators who have kept it up in their barnes, whereby it is thus come to passe: and therfore they seeke their remedie against them, as by fighting against their enemy, avoyding infection by leaving the place of their habitation in time of pestilence, providing for themsel∣ves in time of plenty &c. but they looke not so much to the hand of God who maketh use of these evill instruments to punish and afflict them; & doe not call to mynd their sins which are alwaies the me∣ritorious cause of affliction & adversitie, and so seeke in the first place to God, and then use the meanes to remove the secon¦dary cause of such evils. But for our parts we learne hence2 Vse. this instruction or exhortation, ever in all estates to looke unto the hand of God the Lord of heaven and earth, who ruleth the aging of the seas that the waves thereof re still, that holdeth the windes in his ist, and ruleth Iob 9: 9. Arctarus and Orion and Plejades and the Clymates of the south, who  giveth fruitfull seasons, and filleth oury Acts. 14: 17. earts with food and gladnes, who also  maketh the fruitfull land to become bar∣rainez Psal. 107: 34.
for the sins of the people that are there∣in. Are we in posperity, and good estate? have we that which we would have? let us thē consider that it is the hand of the Lord that hath done this. It is he hat Math. 6: 26. 28. clotheth the lilies & feedeth the ravens: it is he that filleth every living thing with plenteousnesse. Wherfore let us in such cases be thank∣full to God, and offer him the first fruites of our increase, psalmes & songs of praise for his many fold mercies to us, Deut. 8: 18. Are we in affliction, persecution, warre famine, pestilence &c. whatsoever it be? let us not be like the dog that flies at the stone and neglecteh him that thro∣weth it, but consider that there is Amos 3: 6. n evill in the Citie and the Lord hath not don it: and therefore in our affliction let us seeke unto him for aide and assistance who only saveth his servants and delive∣reth them when they cry unto him. Con∣sider further that there is no evill befal∣leth us, but our Lam. 3: 39. sins have deserved it and much more if the Lord should call al our sins to remembrance. This wil keepe us from murmuring and complayn∣ing against God, as if he were unjust in hi administrations. Consider also, that i
is the Lord who sendeth the affliction and he is our heavenly father, and afflicteth & chastiseth us becaus he Pro. 3: 12. loveth us, and he doth it for our good, that being chaste∣ned here, we may not be condemned hereafter. Therfore let us with patience beare it knowing that there is 1 Cor. 10: 13. no tempta∣tion overtaketh us but such as is common to men, and he is faithfull, who will not fuffer us to be tempted above that we are able, and will to every temptation give an happie issue. And thus in prosperity being thankfull, and in adversity being patient, we shall make a good and holy use of every estate in which we are, and so glorifie our hea∣venly father whose providence and care doth over-rule rnd governe all thinges, and in the end we shall have the comfort of it in our soules when having past over a fewe dayes (or short time) of affliction here with patience, we shall hereafter be made pertakers of eternall prosperitie and happinesse. THE END.
IVDAH'S BLESSING Fore told by Jacob his father On His death bed An exposition of the 8. 9. 10. 11. and 12. Verses of the 49. Chap. of Genesis espetially of vers 10. pu∣blikly performed on the Lord's day 27. mo Octo∣bris. 1641. Gen. 49. IT is written, Jsa. 38: 1. that King Hezekiah was sick unto death, and Isaiah the prophet the son of Amoz came unto him and said unto him, Thus saith the Lord, set thin house in order: for thou shalt dye and not live. And here we have godly Jacob▪ though he had no prophet sent unto him, yet knowing himself by the Spirit of pro∣phesie, that his death approached, and ha∣ving
the messenger of death (sicknesse) sent unto him to prepare and bring him thereunto; he doth before his departure (by the instruction of the Spirit of God) set his house in order; and that not only in respect of temporall, but also of Spiri∣tuall thinges. For in this chapter is re∣corded the last speech of this holie pa∣triarch to his sons not long before his death. And it consisteth of two partes. First, prophesie. Secondly, precept. In his propheticall speech or oration he doth declare unto them, that which should befall them in the last dayes. In the precept he giveth them command con∣cerning his buryall. Manie thinges he doth by the Spirit of prophesie foretell unto them, which have bin performed in the ages following, and long after his departure, and they are both good and evill; but espetially of the future division of the land of Canaan amongst their families; and of the King∣dome of the tribe of Judah, and of the Messiah which was to come of the same stocke. The which prophesie he shut∣teth up with a generall blessing. So that it may be called the blessing of Jacob,
pronounced to his sons (though it be not without some curses unto some of them) becaus of what Moses saith of it Vers 28. Or it may be called the last will and Te∣stament of Jacob, becaus he doth herein (as the servant and minister of God) di∣stribute, or pronounce unto his sons, their severall partes and portions in the bles∣singes of God, both Spirituall and tem∣porall: even as a naturall father doth his goods unto his children; for that is no more in the power of naturall parents, than was this which Jacob did, in his; for they are but stewardes of God, and his ministers in the distributing of the one and the other. For it is God that is the prime and effitient giver of them, and without him no blessing temporall or Spirituall can be conferred upon anie. In the chapter we have these generall partes. 1. The blessing or Testament of Jacob to his sons to Vers 29. 2. His command concerning his buriall, to Vers 33. 3ly his death. vers last. In the first of which generall parts, we maie observe many particulers, as na∣mely. 1. The preparation which Jacob maketh to pronounce this prophesie
Vers 1. 2. which hath respect to all his sons in generall. 1. He calleth them unto him, saying, gather your selfes to∣gither, &c. Vers 1. 2. being come he exhorteth them (1) again to a joynt as∣sembling and gathering togither about him, that so they might all be the better partakers of what he should speak, being now a sick man lying in his bed Vers 2. Then (2) to audience and attention with diligence, they being his last wordes that he had to speak unto them; that so they might not be frustrate of the com∣fort or instruction, which they should receave thereby: adding thereunto a rea∣son to move them to attention, taken partly from themselves, they were his sons, thereby bound to obey him in this; and partly from himself, in respect of his name, he was Jacob the son of Isaac, the son of Abraham, to whom the promi∣ses were made, and also Israell, a name given him of God, becaus he had wrest∣led with God and prevailed, and was the prophet of the Lord, to whom the Lord by his Spirit revealed thinges to come; & partly in respect of his place, he was their father, and therfore with reverence
and due attention to be hearkened unto by them his sons, espetially now in his last wordes. Secondly, his prophesie of his twelve sons in particuler; as namely (1) Reuben Vers 3. 4. (2) Simeon and Levi Vers 5. 6. 7. (3) Judah. to vers 13. and so foorth of the rest. Nowe becaus it is my purpose (by God's grace) to speak somewhat in particuler of Judah's prediction, I shall therfore forbeare to speake further of the generall, but make a staie here on this particuler. Wherein we may note. 1. The person whom this prophesie concerneth; namely Iudah, to whom Jacob doth seem to ascribe (as it were with a cheerful Spirit) more honour and dignitie, tha unto any other of his sons; and therfor he preferreth him before them all i saying, his bretheren shall praise himVers 8. Which seemeth to be the blessing in ge¦nerall which Jacob putteth upon him the which he doth afterwardes more pa¦ticulerly inlarge▪ And it is an allussio unto his Iudah or Iehudah, in greek, Iudas; by interpre∣tation, a Confessor, or the son of confession, or of praise. Of him all the sons of ac are called Ievves Est. 3: 6. Mat. 27: 37. and he is a true Ievv, vib praise is of God. Rom. 2: 29. Aynsvv. in Gen. 29: 35. name, and me thinkes in m mynd I could as it were behold aged I¦cob
now with joy lifting up his voice, and speaking much after this manner. O Iudah, thou art truly called Iudah, thy condition is even answerable to thy name; for whereas thy mother did name thee Iudah (Gen. 29: 35.) from the thankes or praise which she gave unto God at thy birth: So thou thy self doest resemble thy name, for thou art praise worthy, yea thy bretheren shall praise thee; that is, they shall give to thee the praise and com∣mendation of singular virtue, dignitie, and power, and shall acknowledge thee of great renowne amongst them in respect of the governement. 1 Cron. 5. 2. Hos. 11: 12. If we looke upon Iudah him selfe, and his life, we shall see that he was stained; for before we read in the hy∣storie of him, Gen. 37: 26. and 38: 15. VVith. 44: 16. that he conspired in the selling of Ioseph to the Ishmeelites and that he defyled Tamar his daughter in lawe, but now he had repented, and by his vertuous and grave carriage, had again wonne his fathers love and respect, and not only so, but The author intendeth not that by his good carriage he vvon God's favour as he did his fa∣thers, as after appeareth. God's also, by whose Spirit it is that this prophesie is pronoun∣ced to him. So that if we should looke upon Iudah's falling, we can not but con∣fesse
that he meritted no such praise at the handes of God, or men, but rather dis∣grace: yet we see how the Lord after his repentance doth cover his sin, and accept him into such great favour, that he maketh him the cheife ruler, and of him came the Kinges of Iudah, yea and Christ himselfe according to the flesh, who is the King, preist, and prophet of his Church. Whence note. That the giftes of GodDoctrine▪ God's gifts are free. are of his free grace and mercie, and not of nature, or mans merit or desert in any respect, If Iudah had bin rare for good∣nes in his life, and had lived chastly, and unreproveable, then the prerogative of nature might have seemed to have caused him to be thus dignifyed, and Christ to come of him: but seing he was not so but blotted with his other bretheren, i the conspiracie against Ioseph, and by reason of his daughter in lawe, it appea∣reth plainly that it was of God's fre grace and mercie that he was thus honou¦red above his other bretheren. Rom. 9 15. 16. And there is good reason for it  for (1) God is the Creator, nature an  man is the creature, therfore it can not be that either nature or man can deserve ani
thing at the handes of God: for God giveth the gifts and enduments of nature; he giveth also the Philip. 2: 13. will and power to think or doe any thing that is good, and without Iohn 15: 5. him we can doe no thing. Ther∣fore whatsoever we give to him, we give him but his owne; and this can not de∣serve any praise at his handes. Rom. 11: 35. 36. 2 Cor. 3: 5. Act. 17: 28. 1 Cron. 29: 14. 2ly, The end of our Creation  is the glory and praise of our maker, that his praise, mightie power, and glorie may be seen in us. Now if we doe any thing, whereby our heavenly father is glori∣fyed; we doe but answere the end wher∣fore we were made, and therfore merit no thing at his handes. 3ly, whatsoe∣ver  we doe which is good, is no more than what God hath commanded us by his lawe: therefore when we have don all we can, Luk 17: 10. Isa. 64: 6. we are but unprofitable ser∣vants, we have done no more than was our dutie. If we could keepe the whole law, thus it were with us; but alas! we come so farre short of that, that we doe no particuler, or circumstance thereof without sin, without some omission or commission, either in matter, or forme; in
substance, or circumstance, contrary to the tenour or full extent of God's com∣mandements. All our works are imper∣fect, and wanting in something or other. Now God, he is perfect and compleat in all thinges; how then can our imperfect works merit any thing at the handes of a perfect God. Manie thinges might be herein spo∣ken, but this cometh in by the waie, and is not the principall thing by me aymed at: Therfore (1) it serveth to reprove the  error of our adversaries the papists, and all others whatsoever, who doe dream of the mercie of God, and his gifts, to be bestowed for anie merit or worthynes in those upon whom they are bestowed; or that God doth foreordaine men to life and salvation, for their foreseen faith and workes, which in time they should manifest. Rom. 3: 20. 28. And it may serve to teach us, to judge aright of God's dealing with men, and say with the Psal∣mist (Psal. 115: 1.) not unto us oh Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name be the praise; and with the Apostle Paul (Eph. 2: 8. 9. 10. by grace we are saved through faith, and that not of our selves: it is the gift o
God, &c. For if it be Rom. 11: 6. of workes, then t is no more of grace otherwise workes are o more workes; and if it be of grace then t is no more of workes, otherwise grace is o more grace. And this is 1 Cor. 1: 29. 31. that no flesh hould glory in his presence; but as it is written, he that gloryeth, let him glory in he Lord. Wherfore seing it is thus freely  of God's grace and mercie to us; let itPsal. 116: 12. move us to the more thankfulnes, when we consider the tender pitie and compas∣sion which the Lord sheweth unto us the sinfull offspring of Enosh-Adam, poor miserable and earthly man. Alas! what worth was there in Adam when he had sinned? but only the free grace of God that made him that promise. Gen. 3: 15.  With Rom. 9: 11. 12. And seing he so freely bestoweth his graces and gifts upon s; let us freely addict our selves, and give p our selves as a living sacrifice to him, Rom. 12: 1. 2. There is none, but would ccount it an unworthy thing, for one that hath bin a poore Captive, and in di∣tresse, and ransomed out of his captivity with a great somme of monie, and that y a stranger, onlie to serve him, in a ight, comfortable, and honourable
office; if he should after he is freed be wilfully disobedient, refractory, and for∣getfull of his master's kindnesse. Would we not thus serve men? or be so serve our selves? let us take heed then how w provoke God. Wee were absolutly strangers to him, and in captivitie, yea  damnable thraldome, no hope for us the¦rein but death and damnation; he hath purchased for us our redemption, and freedome, 1 Pet. 1: 18. 19. not by silver and gold, but th pretious blood of his deare son, and that t this end that we should Luk. 1: 74. serve him with∣out feare in holynes and righteousnes and hi service is perfect 1 Cor. 7: 22. freedome, yea it i an honourable service, an easy service becaus he Rom. 8: 26. helpeth us himselfe in th worke: and should wee be disobedien willingly? should we be negligent an carelesse in his matters? certainly ou owne mouthes will condemne us, eve as 2 Sam. 12: 5. David did himselfe to Nathan. I a sure we would be ready to condemne an man (as I said before) that should be s undutifull to us; yea hang him up, if w had but power; put him in prison; sen him away to his bondage again; and a too good for such a miscreant. Wha
reward me so for my love, and free kind∣nesse to him? Ah beggerly fellow! what hath he deserved at my handes, that I should doe thus and thus for him? Away with him, I will have no more to doe with him. I would that this could be duely considered by us, it would make us feare and tremble before God, and be more carefull. Furthermore let us take heed, seing  that we receave the gifts and graces of God freely (not for any thing of our de∣sert) how we be puffed up or swollen with pride or vaine conceipt of any wor∣thinesse in our selves, and contempt of others, becaus we have receaved gifts or enduements before others. We have no thing, but what we have, receaved; ther∣fore not fit for us to 1 Cor. 4: 7. boast as if we had not receaved it, but let us walke humbly with our God, considering that he that hath given us any thing freely, can also take it from us, and can and doth freely bestow the like upon others, for he is bound to no mans person, but distributeth his gifts and graces where, how, and when he pleaseth. In that Judah notwithstanding he had
sinned before with his daughter in lawe, and also consented to the selling of Jo∣seph; yet now is rcceaved into favour, and thus honoured before his bretheren: we may further learne; That true repen∣tanceDoctrine. A true peni∣tent hath as good assu∣rance as if he had never sinned. for sin committed bringeth men to the assurance of God's favour so absolutly as if they had not sinned. If sinners come once to be truly touched with the sight of their sin wch they have commit∣ted, and to be heartily sorrie for the same, and to amend their wayes; the Lord doth so passe by their iniquitie, & accept them into his favour again, as if they had never done any thing amisse. He doth cover their sins with the righteousnes of his son, and beholdeth them no more; but thenceforth looketh upon the sinner as being just and righteous, and so doth ac∣cept of him. Wee have the scripture plentifull of examples to prove this, as David, Manasseh, Peter, &c. Yea and many promises of God too, that he wi Ier. 31: 34. remember their iniquities no more, &c▪ But I shall not insist upon this having ta∣ken up too much time on the forme point, which I only delivered as by th way, ayming at some thing els more parti∣culerly.
Iudah, thy bretheren shall praise thee.Vers 8. Some there are that understand this speech otherwise than hath bin before opened viz that they should call them∣selves all by his name; and so it came to passe that the Jewes were so Est. 3: 6. called after the name of this Judah. But the former sence seemeth the best. Neither may we tye it precisely to Judah; but it was more largely fulfilled to his tribe and po∣sterity, who remained most stedfast in the service of God, and had the preheminence of the other tribes; as we may see in the famousest of the Kings; and espetially in Christ, who came of Judah according to the flesh, whose praises all nations tongues and peoples, but espetially the sons and daughters of God (who are his Mar: 3: 35. brethe∣ren, Eph. 5: 30. bone of his bone and flesh of his flesh by faith) are to sound forth. In the next place we have the reason wherfore his fathers sons, that is, the rest of the tribes should praise him, or his tribe. 1. For his warlike strength, and victory, in the first part of Vers 8. 2ly his Kingly power and dignity. Vers 8. 9. 3ly becaus of the coming and aigne of the Messiah who was to be
borne of him. Vers 10. 4ly for the earthly Inherirance of Judah. Vers 11. 12. In that it is for these causes that his bre∣theren should praise him; namely, for the great favours and blessinges both Spi∣rituall and temporall which God be∣stoweth on him above others; we may▪ observe. That those men are most ofDoctrine. Honour those vvhom God doth honour. all to be honoured and praised, upon whom God bestoweth most of his gifts and graces. Not the Iam. 2: 2. 3. rich and mighty men of the world, those that are of grea esteeme amongst the people of the world (who doe erre in their actions) not thos that are able to doe most for us by gift and rewardes &c., in outward thinges but those whom God doth endue wit prerogatives from heaven, those are mo to be honoured. I give my goods unto th Saints, those that excell in vertue, Psal. 16 2. 3. Such as God calleth to place an dignity, or such as he endueth wit his holy Spirit, those are to be looke upon as those whom God doth honour and if he vouchsafe to honour them, will prove dangerous to us to dishono them. As we may see in Moses and Davi whose haters God did take vengeance o
But this is also from the generall, and therefore I shall not insist upon it; but proceed to the third cause of Judah his praise, or the 3d branch or particuler in the prophesie or blessing pronounced by his father to him, conteyned in Vers 10. and layd downe in these wordes, The scepter shall not depart from Iudah nor aVers 10. law-giver from between his feet, untill Shiloh come: and unto him shall the gathe∣ring of the people be. In which words is conteyned the third and cheif part of the oracle, to wit, the Coming and King∣dome of the Messiah, who was to be borne of this tribe. This doth also serve greatly to set forth and illustrate unto Iudah, yea and confirmeth to him the former part, of his Kingly power and dignitie. For the Kingly Majestie and supream power is given more clearly to Iudah than be∣fore, when he saith, that the scepter shall not depart &c. untill. &c. Broughton in his viewe of the holy Scriptures saith, That his fathers sons did bow downe to him, when they did crowne David king and performed all seruice to him, and to Solomon after him; and so they should have done to all succeeding Kings
of Iudah: but ten of them in Rehoboams time fell off from their obedience, and so continued untill their captivitie. Yet one Shebet (that is, tribe) namely Benjamine stooke to Iudah untill Shiloh or Christ came. And the Sinedrion which was the great and highest Court, and had commis∣sion for the great and weightie causes in that people, and is by Iacob called the law-giver was not quite taken from this people untill the Romanes in Christ's time abridged them of the power of life and death. So that the Iewes then said to Pilate, it is not lawfull for us to put him to death, Ioh. 18: 31. Eusebius in his ecclesiasticall history Lib. 1. Cap. 7. saith when Herod the first of them which unto Israell are counted strangers receaved rule over the Iewish nation; the prophesie written by Moses in that behalf was fulfilled, which said, there shall not want a prince in Iudah, neither a leader faile of his loynes, untill he come for whom it was kept and reserved, whom he pronounced to be the expectation of the gentiles. (And a little after) Be∣fore they were led into captivity their Kinges raigned, and after their captivitie
there wanted not those which governed the people, wherein the best ruled, and those fewe in nomber. The Scepter, in Hebrew Shebet. This word I find by our translators to have a threefold signification or use: 1: a rod or scepter: 2: a tribe or generation des∣cending of a patriarch. 3. Chastening or correction, by a metaphor, Job. 21: 9. And by reason of the various rendering of the word divers opinions are taught from this text. The word properly doth signifie a rod or staffe, and is by Moses applyed to the tribes of Israell in the mentioning of them. And the cause of his naming a tribe Shebet, doth seem to be either from that the Lord comman∣ded the children of Israell to take twelve rods, one of every prince according to the house of their fathers, and to write every mans name upon his rod &c. Nom. 17: 2. Or els, becaus the twelve tribes grew out of the stock of Israell as branches, rods, or staffes out of a tree. So the greeke translators doe interpret it often. 1 Sam. 10: 19. 20. 21. 1 King. 11: 32. 35. 36. Wherfore mr. Aynsw. under∣standeth the prophesie to be that Judahs
tribe should continue distinct untill Christ's coming, wheras the other ten tri∣bes were scattered and confused by their captivity, 2 Kings. 17: 18. out of which they returned not, as the tribe of Judah with Benjamine did from Babilon Ezra. 1: 5. and mr Broughton under∣standeth it (as before) of the tribe of Benjamine which was a Shebet, that it should not depart from the tribe of Ju∣dah. It signifieth or implyeth also the power of goverment which should con∣tinue in this tribe; for Shebet (as mr Aynsw. saith) signifieth also a scepter (which is a rod or staffe of power given to princes in token of authority) and so the word is rendered, Psal. 45: 6. The greeke translate it here a prince; and that seemeth to be becaus of Psal. 110: 2. where it may be so well understood, but by a figure, viz the rod of thy strength, for him that shall have the scepter of thy strength. The Chaldee, one that hath dominion. And Tharg: Jer, Kin∣ges shall not cease, &c. 1 Cron. 5: 2. Out of all which, and other considera∣tions I gather the proper understanding of it in this place to be a scepter as our
translation yeilds it. 1. Becaus it is a speech of the Empire and power of Iu∣dah over his bretheren. 2. becaus there is added a law-giver, therfore it de noteth a scepter of authoritie. 2. The seventie interpreters translate it properly a prince &c. 4. The event of the pro∣phesie maketh this interpretation good, as we may perceave plainly by examina∣tion of the times. Lawgiver, that is statute maker. The Hebrew doctors say Scribe, doctors to teach the lawe: also writer of decrees. A title of goverment given to God, Isa. 33: 22. Sometimes to governors sent of God, Nom. 21: 18. The gr: here saith governour; in reference here∣unto the Lord speaketh, Psal. 60: 7. From betwene his feet, that is (saith •r Aynsw.) borne and brought up by him, Deut. 28: 57. the feet being taken sometimes for the whole leg or thigh, Gen. 46: 26. The greeke here saith out of his thighes. If the Scepter, and the lawe giver  shall not depart from Iudah, then Iudah ust have them, for the scepter is the ingdome, and law giver is the highest
power of making lawes, and comman∣ding them: therefore Judah shall rule and sway the scepter, and shalbe in great power among his bretheren. 2ly. Seing  it is said that the Scepter shall not depart from Iudah, untill Shilo come, &c. he promiseth Iudah not a short Kingdome but durable, long to continue in his tribe. It shall not depart, therfore it shall re∣maine in his family, kinges after kinges shalbe borne of him untill, &c. 3ly. In  that it is said a lawgiver shall not depart this is added as an intimation of the in∣clination of the Kingdome, and chang of the goverment; as if he should hav said, he shall long hold the scepter wit kingly power, but at length that powe being abated, and the honor of an esta¦blished king being lacking, yet ther shalbe the royalty remaining, he shal notwithstanding hold the cheife power And so we may distinguish the events for from David to the captivitie of Ze¦dekiah, the tribe of Iudah had a succe¦sion of Kings. After rhe captivity fro Zerubbabell to Christ, the kingly digni¦tie being lost, the governement wa continued by princes in the tribe of Iu¦dah
and the Sinedrion. 4ly. In that he  saith, the scepter shall not depart, &c. untill, &c. he seemeth to teach that the earthly Kingdom and dominion of Ju∣dah should have an end, and was not to be perpetuall, Gen. 19: 22. and 24: 33. 5ly. he prescribeth the end of the King∣dom  and power of Judah in the coming of the Messiah, and this was a spetiall note whereby the Jewes (had they not bin start blind) might have knowen the comeing of Christ; for their losse of the government shall judge that the Mes∣siah is come: and on the other hand the coming of the Messiah shall certainly judge that the end of Iudah's kingdome and power is come. 6ly. In this pro∣mise  he doth foretell the Messiah to be borne of the tribe of Iudah. Shiloh. Shil in hebrew is son, and Shilo his son, taken from Shilih (as some of the learned note) signifying that wherein the child is folded in the mo∣thers wombe, to signifie the infirmities of of our nature, all which except sin Christ did take in his mothers wombe. Some by affixing the letter (h) at the nd will have the seed of the virgin
noted. Shiloh is also by interpretation▪ the peacemaker, prosperer, or the safe∣maker. So that this is meant of Jesus Christ who was to spring out of Judah, Heb. 7: 14. To him shall the gathering, &c. ga∣thering or obedience of the people This sheweth that the kingdome o Christ which should succeed Judah's should be universall, (whom not onli the Jewes but the elect of all other na¦tions should gather unto and obey Isa. 11: 10. Rom. 15: 12. Isa. 42: 4▪ Math. 12: 21.) and Spirituall, whic should be set up not by sword and a¦mes, but by the preaching of the gospell For it is not said they shalbe forced t come, but thy shall gather, that is t say, voluntarily and freely. The wor here used signifyeth obedience or ga¦thering. The Seventie, and Jerom render it (prosdokia) the expectatio or waiting for of the Gentiles accordin to Hag. 2: 7. where he is called the de¦sire of the gentiles. Pagninus saith, gathe¦ring together. The most simple is obe¦dience, and so mr Aynsw. hath it. That i the people shall obey the Messiah, an
willingly submit themselves to his King∣dome and gospell. It agreeth with Psal. 2: 8. and 72: 11. So that considering what hath bin formerly spoken hitherto (though but rudely and confusedly considering the weighty subject in hand) we may from this gather and receave confirmation of our knowledge, and so consequently of our faith concerning the family, person, and kingdome of the Messiah; espetial∣ly of his coming in the flesh to wit of the tribe of Iudah; and his Kingdome not a worldly, but Spirituall; not among the Iewes only, but in the gathering of the people; this to come when the Scepter departed from Iudah. The which teacheth against the Iewes. 1. That the time of Christs coming in the flesh is past. 2. That this Messiah is Jesus the son of Mary the virgin, and therfore but in vain to seek for an other. Against this the Iewes cavill thus. First, they say Shebet is a rod or affliction.Cavils of the Ievvs. Answere, it is true, but to construe it so  here, were to resist and pervert the scope of the Oracle. For (1) Iacob foretelleth prosperous and joyfull things
to Iudah, and not sorrowe, (2) he said before, his bretheren should bow downe, and he compared him to a lyon: ther∣fore not affliction. (3) That which fol∣loweth is contrary to this understanding viz a lawgiver, which sheweth the rule that this tribe should have. (4) The seventy in gr. and the best Iewish rabi∣nes so interpret it and. (5) The event sheweth it also unto us. But the af∣fliction of the people, although it be∣gan shortly after Ioseph's death; yet it was not of the tribe of Iudah only  neither was it alwayes upon the tribe o Iudah, as upon the other tribes; but ofte times Iudah was in safety, The Iewes to put by the coming o  Christ to be already past, they feigne or pretend some princes to be yet re∣mayning of Iudah in some farre remote places of the world. But this maketh little to the purpos in hand, for this promise hath respec unto the land of Canaan. Some of them say that Shiloh is h  that shall be sent, and they understan it of Nebucchadnezzar who was sent t afflict them. But how he could be sai
to be the desire of the gentiles (as Hag. saith) I know not. Other cavils there be, which would take up time to re∣peat, and the edification we should have thereby would not be worth the time. This text it self, and the consi∣deration of the accompishment of it, nd the agreement of other scriptures, affordeth a plain and evident proofe of his. viz. That the child Luc. 2: 21. Iesus con∣eaved of the holy Luc. 1: 35. Ghost, born of he virgin Luc. 2: 7. Mary in the dayes of Mat. 2: 1. He∣od the King, (when the power of go∣ernement was quite taken away from the ribe of Iudah, & exercised by the Roma∣s) who manifestested himself Acts 10: 38. Rom. 1: 4. with po∣er and mightie signes to be the son of od, healing diseases, giving sight  the blinde, preaching the gospell to e poore, &c. that this Iesus (I say)  that true Shiloh which was sent to be e son of a virgin, and our prosperer, and emaker, the true Christ, anointed, and essiah and that true Immanuel, which as promised to be sent into the world  the redemption of the lost posterity  Adam; and that he is already come in e flesh, and hath suffered for our sins,
and rose again the third day, and is ascended up into heaven, where he shal be c received till the time of the re∣storationAct. 3: 21. of all things. To this we have the prophets Act. 10: 43. witnes∣sing in divers places; to this the Euange∣lists & Apostles assent; and this the Spirit of God hath also by his word perswaded us to beleeve and hold against all here∣tickes, and opposers, Iewes and gentiles. This is the mysterie of godlines. 1 Tim. 3: 16. This is that sure corner stone, 1 Pet. 2: 4. 5. 6. &c. This is the lambe of God, which taketh away the sins of the world. Iohn 1: 29. This is he, who is the king, priest, and prophet of his Church; and who is appointed of the fa∣ther to be the Iudge of quick and dead; in whom, whosoever beleeveth, and abi∣deth in his faith, and in the love of him he shal be saved, and shall goe in, and out and dwell safely. Ioh. 3: 16. Let the consideration of this therfore  move us, to magnifie the name of ou heavenly father, who hath given unto us such a cleare light of his gloriou Gospell, whereby we may know him and his son Iesus Christ whom he hath
sent, wherein consisteth eternall life (Joh. 17: 3) and hath revealed these thinges so plainlie unto us, that we have where∣withall to answere anie gainsayer; and can boldly say, that Iesus is the Christ, and that he is our Saviour, and redeemer. Let us then hold fast this full assu∣rance  of faith and hope unto the end. Seing God hath revealed his son from heaven unto us (this glorious mysterie, which the Angels desire to looke into, 1 Pet. 1: 12.) let us take heed of falling back or declyning. Heb. 10: 23. 38. And if we doe believe this confidently,  to wit, That Jesus is the Christ, that he is come in the flesh at the time appointed, and hath suffered for our sins, and rose againe for our Iustification: let us then manifest this our faith by the fruits of righteousnes; and let us walke here, as the members of Christ, in the Kingdome of grace; that when his second coming shal be, he may take us into his kingdome of glory. And let us take heed, that we take not upon us a profession of the Tit. 1: 16. knowledge of God, and in our workes deny him: but let us Heb. 10: 24. provoke one an other to love and to good workes; that so we may
glorifie our heavenly father, which hath called us out of darknesse into his mar∣veilous light: and becaus we are called unto holinesse, let us labour to be holy in all manner of conversation. Amen. THE END.
