G1161 E328_22 99872425 159609
CRETENSIS: OR A BRIEFE ANSWER TO an ulcerous Treatise, lately publish∣ed by Mr THOMAS EDVVARDS, intituled, GANGRAENA: Calculated for the Meridian of such passages in the said Treatise, which relate to Mr John Goodwin; but may without any sensible error indifferently serve for the whole Tract. Wherein some of the best means for the cure of the said dangerous ulcer, called Gangraena, and to prevent the spreading of it to the danger of the precious soules of men, are clearly opened, and effectually applied; By the said JOHN GOODVVIN, a well-willer to the Saints, in the work and patience of Jesus Christ. The Cretians are alwayes liers, evill beasts, &c. This witnesse is true: Where∣fore rebuke them sharply (, cuttingly) that they may be sound in the Faith, Tit. 1. 12, 13. And I heard a lowd voice saying in Heaven, Now is come salvation and strength and the Kingdome of our God, and the power of his Christ; for THE AC∣CƲSER OF OƲR BRETHREN is cast downe, &c. Revel. 12. 10. Let not an evill-speaker be established on earth: evill shall hunt the violent man to overthrow him, Psal. 140. 11. But they shall proceed no further; for their folly shall be manifest unto all men, as theirs also was, 2 Tim. 3. 9. Qui ergo bene mentitur, & abs{que} ullâ verecundiâ, quicquid in buccam venerit, confingit in fratres, magistrum se optimum probat▪ Hieronymus. l. 1. Apol. adversus Ruffin. . Musaeus. Published according to Order. LONDON, Printed by M. S. for Henry Overton, and are to be sold at his Shop in Popes-head Alley. 1646.
CRETENSIS; OR A BRIEFE ANSVVER to an ulcerous Treatise, lately published by Mr Thomas Edwards, intituled, GANGRAENA. BEhold (saith the Lord Christ to Peter) Satan hath desired you, that he may sift you as wheat Luk. 22. 31.. Men use to sift wheat more carefully and thoroughly, then other graine. The reason is, because it being the purest and richest of all graine, a little beggery or soyle left in it, is so much the greater eye-sore, whilst it is yet in the heap, or hand; and besides any mixture of drosse being ground with wheat, is (for the same reason) the more offensive in taste, when bread comes to be made of it. So that our Saviours meaning in the recited passage is; that the Devill hath a very great desire to obtaine leave from God of sifting the Saints thoroughly, i. by libertie of temptation to try them to the utter∣most, what may be gotten out of them by way of weakness and cor∣ruption; not indeed to make them the more pure, (though this be Gods designe in the permission) but to render them the more sin∣full and polluted, and to abate and pull downe their high interests both with God and man. The Author of the late Treatise, knowne by the marke of a Gan∣greneSect. 2. or Cancer in the forehead of it, being (as it seems) of Satans counsell, and partaker of his intentions against the Saints, hath di∣ligently
swept his floore, and gathered together his siftings, all that drosse and beggery of weaknesses and infirmities, which Satan with∣in the compasse of foure yeares (by his own confession) was able to sift out of them, and he to come to the knowledge of; and hath ground, kneaded, and bak't it, and made shew-bread of it, for such of the Presbyterian Sons of Levi, and their retinue, to eat, as are of his own dyet and constitution. But (doubtlesse) the man suffers losse in his designe, upon the same terms, and by the same occasion, upon which his Grand Tutor many times suffers the like also in his; who, though his subtiltie and industry to promote his kingdome, be very great and formidable, yet is ever and anon befool'd by his malice, which is predominant, and magnifies it selfe above them both. This still importunes him for present action against the Saints, and suf∣fers him not to preconsider, whether the winning of the Rests, be not like to lose him the race. So (doubtlesse) Mr Edw. being over∣come, even to an intoxication, with the sweetnesse of his end, the de∣famation of his poore innocent helpless Brethren, sirnamed (by him∣selfe and many others, who of late have acted themselves into a far deeper merit of the name, and that in the worst sense & constructi∣on of the word) Independents; had not his Prudentials free, to consi∣der, whether the course which he hath steer'd to drown them in the black Sea of infamy and reproofe, be not more like to carry them into the faire Havens of honour. For he that chargeth his enemy, whose reputation in every kinde he sets himself to tread and tram∣ple under foot, like clay and mire in the streets, onely with such and such crimes; he doth not so much charge him with these, as acquit and discharge him from all others. There is no reasonable man, but will abate and deduct, and thatSect. 3. to a good proportion, from such reckonings and accounts, which are drawne up and given in to him by the hand of envie: much lesse will he judge such accounts short, or defective in particulars. So that whereas Mr Edw. conceits, that he hath now in his Gangraena in∣form'd the world, how bad and vile these Sectaries and Independents are; the Truth is, that he hath done this but faintly, and with the extreame hazard of his own reputation; but he hath justified and ac∣quitted them with an high hand from all other crimes and imputa∣tions of any worse resentment or import, then those wherewith he asperseth them; and consequently, hath represented them unto the
world as better and far more deserving, then far the greatest part of his own Presbyterian generation. For first, as to matter of pra∣ctise, look of what crimes or miscarriages soever, he hath with any truth, impeached those men, of his indignation; I here (in his own phrase elswhere Antap. p.) cast the glove to him, that if he will accept of the challenge, I will produce both as many for number, as foule (yea far more foule) for nature, perpetrated and done by a far lesse num∣ber of his Classique Proselytes, then they are, amongst whom he pretends to find so many things of such portentuous demerit. Yea and that I will give another manner of account of the realitie and truth of what I bring upon the Stage in this kinde, then he hath done, or ever will be able to doe, of a very considerable part of those things, which his gangred pen hath uttered against his Sectaries. And secondly, for matter of opinion; I cast my glove unto him theSect. 4. second time, that I will doe the like. 1. That I will discover and find out as many errors and heresies, and those of every whit as dange∣rous an import, as those which he pretends (or at least is able to prove) to be at this day extant among those who by the authoritie (or passion rather and precipitancy) of his pen are voted Sectaries, in a far lesser number of his Classique party; onely upon condition, that he shall undertake to perswade those, amongst whom I shall undertake to make this discovery, to answer, and give an account unto me what their judgements are, in all such points and questions, which I shall propose to them. Yea whereas he makes such a Tra∣gicall outcry, that there should be 180 errors and heresies amongst us, as if he were afraid that he should lose his Presbyterian Religion in the crowd; I verily believe (and not without ground) that if he would vouchsafe but freely and candidly to declare his minde and judgement, in all such points, as I would tender unto him, and not professe that Scepticisme himselfe, which he so much abhorres in o∣thers, I could make a discovery of as many (errors and heresies to∣gether I meane) in himselfe alone. Nor doe I judge, that the most Orthodox Presbyterian under Heaven (no nor Independent neither) erres much beneath the like rate or number of errors and mistakes in matters of Religion. And suppose the man were reliev'd with this supposition (CujusSect. 5. tamen contrarium verum est, as will be attested by many Authentique witnesses) that all the tales he tells to make that crowne of honour
to languish and fade, which God hath set upon the heads of those which to him (it seems) are Heathens and Publicans, I meane Se∣ctaries and Independents, were true; yet certainly they that scat∣tered them were more innocent then he that gathered them up, e∣specially with so polluted an intention, as to call the world toge∣ther to see the nakednesse of the Saints, and to rejoyce with Satan in his victories and triumphs over them. If the man had thought good to have served his God in verse as he hath done in prose, hee might have begun his work with this Hexameter, Fortunam Satanae, & magnos cantabo triumphos. Failings through infirmity, are but the footsteps of Flesh and Bloud: but bloudy insultations over men because of failings, be∣wray Principalities and powers, and more, spirituall wickednesses. Doubtlesse, the sinne of Cham in discovering the nakednesse of his Father unto his Brethren, was greater then the sin of his Father in being drunk: Cursed be Canaan, (saith Noah as a Prophet) a ser∣vant of servants shall he be unto his brethren Gen. 9. 25.. And so the fact of Doeg the Edomite in informing Saul against Ahimelech the Priest, about what he had done for David 1 Sam. 22. 9, 10., was by many degrees more stigma∣ticall then any thing that Ahimelech did. The form of those accu∣sationsSect. 6. which Mr. Edwards hath levied against his brethren, is much more inexcusable then the matter of them. Nor doe we read that either Cham or Doeg, though sonnes of much unworthinesse, ever traded with Satan for these black commodities, or compassed the earth to and fro by their Eves-droppers, Agents, or Factors, to gather up and furnish themselves with the sinnes or infirmities of the Saints; no nor that they ever took up a report into their lips a∣gainst any man, upon either the loose or malicious suggestion of o∣thers; but onely related and informed what themselves saw with their own eyes, and that casually and without awaiting the oppor∣tunity. Whether therefore the man we know, hath not comfor∣ted these sonnes of shame by doubling the spirit of their unwor∣thinesse upon himselfe, I leave to the consideration of such men, who have not sacrificed the principles of their ingenuity upon the service of the Classique cause. In publishing the failings and mis∣carriages of persons engaged in the profession of Religion, what hath he else done but sowne the world with the seed both of blas∣phemy against God, contempt of his wayes, and obduration of
the hearts of wicked and prophane men? yea, he hath spread a table for Satan with the shame and sorrowes of the Saints, and made more joy in hell with the noyse of his Gangrene going forth into the world, then that climate hath known for these many genera∣tions; yea, he hath made Belzebub himselfe drunk with the bloud of the Saints, and reputation of his enemies, and hath lifted him up halfe way towards that heaven from which our Saviour long since saw him falling like lightning e. Besides, doe not all men knowLuke 10. that the composition of the world it selfe, and of all the parts of it, consists ex flore & faece, of what is excellent and what is excrement? For Mr. Edwards or any man to judge of Independency by the miscarriages, whether in practice or opinion, of some few that (it's likely) are the retrimentitious part of that way, is as if a man should make an estimate of Cheapside by the chanell that runs in the midst of it, or give sentence of the holy and elect Angels by what is found in sin and wickednesse in the Devils. If Independency hath its tens, Presbytery hath its thousands of the sonnes of Belial in her retinue. And if the man will deale fairly in comparing them together, hee must not set the head of the one against the taile of the other, but measure head with head, and taile with taile. All may bee true which the man chargeth upon Independency, and yet independency lift up her head in worth and dignity as high above Presbytery, Quantum lenta solent inter viburna cupressi, as the Cedar in Lebanon is by the hand of nature advanc'd above the Thistle in Lebanon. The most accursed hypocrites that ever the earth bare, have been of the profession of Christianity, and yet Christianity the best of all professions. That Wolves are oft found in Sheeps cloathing, is so farre from being matter of disparagement unto it, that it rather commends it for the best and most innocent cloathing of all other: Nor ought the sheep (as Augustine said long since) either to lay aside his cloathing, or think the worse of it, be∣cause the Wolfe sometimes puts it on to deceive by it. The Angels of light are not out of love with their shining, because the mini∣sters of Satan transform themselves into their likenesse. Nay, it is a glorious testimony to the outward deportment of the blessed An∣gels, that the Angels of darknesse desire to assume it, when they de∣sire to conceale and hide themselves. The ordinary wisedome of the flesh teacheth men to take of the best to cover the worst withall.
But what atonement can be made for the man and his demerit,Sect. 7. in case he shall be found to sycophantize, to fill the world with for∣ged cavillations and slanders against the Saints? and a great (if not the farre greater) part of what he hath written, bee evidenced to be not of the race or issue of the folly and weaknesse of those that are accused, but of the wisdome of the flesh, and strength of envie in the accuser, and some others, who by the mediation of the same deare interest, are both one flesh and one spirit too with him? Should not the world have cause to feare lest the Sun would be a∣shamed, and the Moon abashed at the very sight of such a monster of impiety as this; and mourn in sackcloth over the deplorable and sad condition of men, that such things should be found with them? yea, and to interpret the birth of it, as a signe that her dissolu∣tion approacheth, and is even at the doores? I have neither leasure nor opportunity to search to the bottome, or sift to the bran, all that the man storieth, per se and per alios, in his Gangrene; nor doe I hold Intelligence with any man to inform my self of his haltings, but I am able of mine owne knowledge to avouch the untruth of some things asserted by him: the untruth of more hath been avou∣ched unto me by others; and I make little question but that when all his accused ones shall have had time and opportunity to stand forth & plead their innocency, there will be very little truth found remaining in any thing reported by him, except (haply) in such things which are transgressions against no Law. In the mean while he hath taken a pretty politick course to saveSect. 8. the stake of his own repute, and to prevent as much as may be, the through examination of the greatest part of what his Gan∣grene represents by way of disparagement to the Independent par∣ty, by printing so many letters so full fraught with these commo∣dities, without the names of their Authors. For by this means he may put down in ink and paper, and make up letter-wise what he pleaseth, and yet no man be able to say unto him that black is his eye for so doing. If hee will affirm that such or such letters were sent unto him, or came to his hands, and withall refuse to produce the authors, or pretend reasons why hee should not name them; well may we suspect jugling: but yet the Jugler hath a Citie of re∣fuge to fly unto to save himselfe out of the hand of a detector. And to me it seems not a little strange, that Mr. Edwards should keep the
names of his informers, who have contributed so liberally towards the same designe with himselfe, under hatches, or within the vaile; when as he prostitutes his own name with so much confidence (that I say not impudence) in the frontispice of his booke. If hee judgeth it honorable in himselfe, to bee taken notice of for Com∣mander in chiefe in the Classique warres against Sectaries and Inde∣pendents; he had no reason to hide the names of his Captains, and those that served in inferior place of command under him in the same service: except he either thinks that they have been too timo∣rous and low-spirited in the action, and in this respect is tender of their reputation, hoping they may quit themselves more like men hereafter, and then he means to bring forth their names with ho∣nour; or else judgeth that his own interest in the glory of the at∣chievement, will rise the better, and bee the greater and more in∣tire, if no man shall be looked upon, or known by name, that gave assistance to him in the work. Or else thirdly, feareth lest the con∣tents of the letters being evicted of forgery and untruth, should re∣flect dishonor upon the indighters, and so discourage and weaken their hand as to any further service in so laudable a cause. But the truth is, that I cannot attribute so much either to the first of these reasons, or to the second, nor yet to the third (though this hath most in it) as to be able to beleeve, that he suppressed his names for any other end, then to suppresse the examination of the truth of the letters. I know, that if I would borrow but a little Presbyterian faith, I could with this, without any demurre or consideration at all, beleeve that all that is contained in the letters from the first to the last of them, is pure and simple truth; and that M. Edwards did very vertuously and commendably in sending away the names of the writers into a land of darknesse. But these being no funda∣mentals, I hope we shall be tolerated without beleeving them with our own faith. One of his Apocryphall letters (p. 66.) comforts his friend, GoodSect. 9. Mr. Edwards (as he stiles him) against me, thus: But whatsoever Mr. John of Colemanstreet sayes, they (the Independents he means) will be found the fighters against God. I grant, they may be so found in the Presbyterian Almanack, through a mistake, but in the originall, the Ephemerides of heaven, they are called Fighters WITH and FOR God. Except the letter-man means, they will be found fighters
against the God of this world, in that Militia which hee hath armed against the nation and servants of the God of Heaven in it. Against this God in his Militia, I confesse, they have fought, and (I doubt not) will fight still more cordially and more courageably then many Anti-Independent soules have done. Indeed if the Independents should turn Turks, and betray their principles, and passe over into the Tents of High Presbytery, they will bee found fighters against God, as well as others. But in the mean season let Mr. Anonymus and his compeers know, that there is no Sect of men in the Land, the sonnes of high Presbytery and Episcopacy onely excepted, that being true to their Principles, are capable of fighting against God, at least in that sense, which both Gamaliel in the Text, and Mr. John of Colemanstreet in his Commentaries intends and prosecutes. Nor let any man think that I breath the least aire of disparagement in the face of Presbytery, by ranging Episcopacy with it: in as much as Mr. Edwards himselfe, springs an ingagement upon Presby∣tery to persecute the Saints under the vaile of suppressing errors, from the laudable practise of her elder sister Episcopacy in the same kind. In another letter of the same Packet (or packing rather,) viz.Sect. 10. p. 55. he presents the honorable and grave Assembly of Parliament (for to them he dedicates his Gangraena, quanta quanta est, from the one end of it to the other) with such a painted peece of lascivious∣nesse and prophanenesse, kissing together, which might probably have found acceptation and thanks, had he presented it to the com∣pany of free Traders in Turnbolstreet, for the beautifying of their Hall: but by exhibiting it to those persons of Gravity and Ho∣nour, he hath traduced the modesty of their eyes and eares, and attempts no lesse then to draw them into part and fellowship with himselfe in his own reproach, by seeking to make them pa∣trons of all the filthy, slanderous, and abominable practices of his pen. In the very front and entrance of his Dedicatory unto them, heSect. 11. tells them that he presents them with a Catalogue, or black Bill: hee might have added (in stead of what hee doth adde) of the same nature, tendency and import with those, which the black Accuser of the Brethren was wont long since by his agents to present unto the Heathen Emperours and powers of this world, against the
Saints of the most high God. And whereas (a few lines after) he professeth that hee much feareth lest the subject matter of his Cata∣logue may prove unto England like the Bill of Divorce given unto Is∣rael; I professe also that I feare the same feare with him, in part, because a great, if not the farre greatest part, of the subject matter of his Catalogue consists of defamatory untruths, forged cavillations, and bloudy insinuations against the servants of God in the Land. And such practises as these in a Nation, (unlesse some speedy and effe∣ctuall course be taken to prevent them) portend indeed little lesse then a bill of divorce from Heaven to that Nation. But for the Errors, Heresies, Blasphemies, and Practices of the Sectaries of this time, which he makes the subject matter of his Catalogue; by that time, 1o all those Tenets which he very erroneously makes Errors and Heresies, to advance his Catalogue; and 2o all those, which are forged in his own brain, falsly fastened upon others, no man holding or owning them: and 3o, all those, which it may be have fallen from the lips or pen of some one inconsiderable and halfe-distracted person, no man seconding him therein: and 4o all those that hee hath per∣verted in the setting down: 5o, all those that (for substance) are re∣peated the second, third, and forth time over. 6o, and lastly, all those Blasphemies and Practises, which without cause or ground of truth he chargeth upon his Sectaries; by that time (I say) that all these shall bee struck out of his black Bill, the Bill will appeare much blacker and fouler then yet (perhaps) it doth in the eyes of many, and so resemble the Author more to the life: But the for∣midablenesse of the subject mattrr of his Catalogue will be much ea∣sed, and the form of it bee found much more formidable then the matter. But I marvaile how Mr Edw. having (it seemes) an authorizedSect. 12. power to make errors and heresies at what rate, and of what mate∣rialls he pleaseth, and hopes to live upon the trade, could stay his pen at so small a number as 180; and did not advance to that An∣gelicall quotient in the Apocalyps, which is ten thousand times ten thousand, and thousand thousands. If he had consulted with a book, not many yeares since printed, which maintaines that dangerous heresie of the Cosmoselenitae, i. of those that hold there is another world in the Moone, and with another, printed within the com∣passe of his foure yeares, intituled, Divinity and Philosophy dissected
and set out by a mad man, with some few others, that I shall shortly be able to name unto him; I will undertake, that out of these he shall be able to increase his roll of errors and heresies, from 180, to 280, if not to 500; and that upon more honest and honourable terms, then now he hath advanc'd it to his own number. And if he pleaseth to repaire unto me before the course of his menstruous or monethly labour comes upon him, I will undertake to inrich his Treasurie of errors and heresies, by twentie and ten, out of his own Antapologie. For certain I am, that every contradiction affords an error, either on the one hand, or on the other: and if I doe not find twenty and ten, and a better number then so, of birds of that feather in that Element, let Mr Edwards pen plough as many long furrows more upon my back, as it hath done. In the meane time, I must crave leave to say (or at least to thinke) that it is a most importune and unsufferable presumption, for a poore, weake thimble-full of dust, that knows not how to range his parts of speech in a sentence, nor to put the nominative case and verb together regularly in Eng∣lish, nor how to frame the structure of a period according to the common rules of reason, Grammar, and common sense; to advance himselfe into a Paper Throne, and from thence, satis pro Imperio & tribunali, pronounce the formidable sentence of Error and Heresie, against all opinions and judgements of men whatsoever, which will not comport with his understanding (or fancie rather) as the stan∣dard of all Truth. Yea and Nebuchadnezzar-like, to slay and smiteDan. 5. 19. what opinion he pleaseth: what he will to set up, and what he will to pull downe. For I professe ingenuously, that I know not by what o∣ther rule or measure, besides his own humour and will, he judgeth of error or heresie. Certaine I am, that if he will stand either to the arbitrement of the Scriptures, or to the principles of cleare & sound Reason, he must discharge and justifie many of those Tenets for in∣nocent, yea and well-deserving Truths, which now he hath arraig∣ned at the barre of his Tribunall for Errors & Heresies. If his Touch∣stone be, the major vote of his own party, I desire to recommend unto him the conscientious perusall of a passage from the pen of a conscientious and learned man of the same side, (I hope he will not say, that he is knowne ex professo, to be of another judgement, then what he plainly expresseth in writing; a base calumny, wherewith to ho∣nour himselfe, he dishonoureth Calvin, p. 45.) If dissentions and
schismes (saith Musculus Si oriantur dissensiones & schismata in Ecclesiâ, in culpâ sunt qui falsam sidem defendūt, non qui impugnāt: Nec refert u∣tri sint multi∣tudine superi∣ores. Ecclesia nam{que} nec ju∣dicat ipsa se∣cundū multi∣tudinem, nec judicanda est secundū ma∣joris numeri consensū, sed secundū mani∣festam verita∣tem in sacris Scripturis ex∣pressam, Musc. Loc. Tit. de Eccle. Sect. 9.) arise in the Church, they are in fault who stand up to maintaine a false faith, not they who oppose it. Nor is it ma∣teriall which partie is the more numerous. For the Church, neither her selfe judgeth according to the multitude, nor is shee to be judged according to the consent of the greater number, but according to the manifest truth ex∣pressed in the Scriptures. If the man will but own the verdict of as learned and ingenuous a pen as ever wrote on his side, he must re∣lease the better halfe (I beleeve) of his prisoners, and instead of an 180 Errors and Heresies, take his tables and write downe, four-score. Secondly, I would know of him, whether this be a regular processe in Law, To ask my fellow whether I be a Thiefe. If Mr Edw. thinks that he ought to be reputed, and honoured as a man Orthodox, till men of his owne judgement vote him erroneous; I know no reason he hath, but to measure out the same measure unto others; and con∣sequently to judge no man or men erroneous or hereticall, untill they be adjudged such by those that concur in opinion with them. As for twenty and ten of those opinions, which he hath impeached of error and heresie, (and I will not say for how many more) I doe here cast the glove to whosoever will take it up, to bring them off with the honour of truth, from all that the man hath to lay to their charge. For I evidently see, that he hath dealt with many precious Truths of God, as the Jews did by Christ himselfe, when they num∣bred him with Transgressors. And particularly, for that which he hath arraign'd in the 70th place in his Catalogue of Errors, viz. that Faith in a proper sense is imputed to justification, and not Christs righteousnesse; (in the sense by me rejected) I thinke I may with far lesse boasting say, what he saith of his abilities in the Church-Controversies; I am (saith he) so farre vers'd in these Controversies, that I challenge, &c Antapol. p. 117.. So may I say without offence, that I am so far versed in the Con∣troversie about the Imputation of faith & Christs active obedience in Justification, that I here challenge all the Presbyterians one after another, assembled, or not assembled, in England, Scotland, France and Ireland, to prove either by the Scriptures, or by dint of argu∣ment, either that faith is not imputed in a proper sense, or that the active obedience of Christ, is in the formalitie of it, imputed in Ju∣stification. P. 45. He labours to justifie the Devill, only to make me appear likeSect. 13. unto him; for in saying, that I deal just by him, as the Devil did by Christ;
doth he not plainly imply, that the Devill did no worse by Christ, then I doe by him? So then if it appeare, that I dealt fairly by him, and did him no wrong, in my citation of his words, then will the Devill be found to be Mr Edwards client, and he the Devills Advo∣cate, and that by the verdict of his own pen. Now then whether I have wrong'd the man the least haire of his head, let the world, and the great Judge himselfe of the world, judge. The case is this. In my Innocencies Triumph, p. 8. I cite these words from his Antapo∣logia, p. 169. The power of the Magistrate by which he punisheth sinne, doth not subserve to the Kingdome of Christ the Mediator. Now to take an occasion of resembling himselfe unto Christ (which he doth more then once in his Gangrene See his Pre∣face, p. 4.) and me unto the Devill, he chargeth me, that citing the former part of the sentence, I leave out the latter: adding further, that had I but named this latter part, it would have been an evident confutation of me. Let any sober and intelligent man, but con∣sider, what that latter part of the sentence is, how incongruous and ill∣coherent with the former, and he will clearly see, that in omitting it, I rather cast a covering upon his nakednesse, then any way preju∣dic'd him; unlesse (haply) he counts this a prejudice to him, not to have his nakednesse and weaknesse appeare to the world all over. But the latter part of the sentence he speaks of, the naming whereof would have been so evident a confutation of me, is this; that he may apply efficaciously  of the Propheticall and Priestly office of Christ: he doth not affect the inward man and conscience with spirituall punish∣ment. Where, first, it is observable, that himself, citing here so much of the latter part of the sentence, as (it seems) he would have had me have cited in my Innocencies Triumph, leaves out the latter part of this latter part it selfe, viz. these words (distinguished onely by a comma, from the former) neither is this instituted of God, and sancti∣fied as the means for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be sa∣ved in the day of Christ. So that if I have dealt by him as the Devill did by Christ, meerly by citing the former part of his sentence without the latter, he deales himselfe by himselfe as the Devill did by Christ, (which is more unnaturall of the two) yea he deales by himselfe, with a far more exact conformitie to the patterne he speaks of, the Devils dea∣ling by Christ, then I, though his charge against me could be justi∣fied. For the Devill did not leave out the latter part of the sentence which he cited, but onely the last words, or latter part of the latter
part of this sentence. For Mr Edw. in affirming that the Devill left out these words, To keep thee in all thy wayes, deales farre worse then the Devill did by Christ; for the Devill did not lie unto Christ, though he tempted him; but whether Mr Edw. doth not dash his foot a∣gainst this stone, in saying the Devill left out the words mentioned, let the Evangelist speak; And he brought him to Jerusalem, (saith Luke) and set him on a pinacle of the Temple, and said unto him, If thou be the Son of God, cast thy selfe down from hence. For it is written, he shall give his Angels charge over thee, to keep thee Luk. 4. 9, 10.. So that the Devill left out but part of those words which Mr Edw. chargeth upon him, viz. these, In all thy wayes; which being the very last words of the sen∣tence, it is Mr Edw. that hath copied out the Devils delinquency to an haire; dealt just by himselfe, as the Devill did by Christ, not I. But whereas other Authors frequently make use of the figure Synecdoche, in putting down a part for the whole; Mr Edw. makes much use in his writings of a new figure, which we may call an Anti-Synecdoche, by putting the whole, yea and sometimes more then the whole for a part. But however, I must give him the testimony of a man im∣partiall between the Devill and the Saints; for though he speakes falsly of these, yet he will not flatter the other with the truth. 2o. I would faine know, in case the former part of his sentence cited by me, be false, whether the addition of the latter would have made it true. If the power of the Magistrate by which he punisheth sin, doth not subserve to the Kingdome of Christ the Mediator (which are the words I cite) would the naming of the following words, that he may apply efficaciously , &c. render or make it subservient thereunto? Therefore I know not how, or wherein I have trespas∣sed either upon the man or his words in the least. If his meaning be, the whole period, former and latter part being taken together, that the power of the Magistrate by which he punisheth sin, doth not subserve to the Kingdome of Christ the Mediator, by an efficacious applying of  of the Propheticall and Priestly Office of Christ, &c. First, the Grammar of the sentence will not beare it. And secondly, if it would, yet such a sense is little better then no sense; the sentence thus taken, being of the same forme and character of speaking with this: The bread by which Mr. Edwards lives, doth not subserve to the maintenance of his life, by making his drinke effectuall to quench his thirst. Or this: The learning by which Mr. Edwards
confuteth the Sectaries, is not subservient to their preferment by giving them houses or lands, or great rewards, &c. If there be sap, savour, or sense in either of these, then may hee have some cause to complain of wrong done unto him, in that the body of that sentence he speaks of, was not produced by me whole and in∣tire, lower parts and upper parts together. But if the period taken together, was of the very selfe-same shape and forme with those, then was it Centaure-like; and then I did him more right then came to his share, in shewing onely the upper parts of it, wherein it was rationall, and like to a man, and concealing the nether parts of it, the discovery whereof makes it appeare like a monster, strange and uncouth to behold. The truth is, that the passage he speaks of, and over which he mourns, finding it without the taile in my cita∣tion, though he calls it a Sentence, yet a sentence it is none, having neither form, feature, nor any property of a sentence in it. And in this my sentence and censure of it, I refer my selfe to all those that have but their senses exercised in discerning between sensible and sense∣lesse sayings. Notwithstanding the man (in his Preface) is tumultuously im∣portuneSect. 14. for an answer to his Antapologie, and calls all the speeches that have been given out by the Independents cōcerning an answer to it, but meer flourishes and swelling words of vanity; as if to talke of an∣swering him, were a swelling word of vanity, a word of too much confidence to proceed from the mouth of a mortall man. Yea, in the very first page of his preface he vapours at an insufferable rate, powring out contempt upon the poore Independents (whom hee calls Dogges, making himselfe or his Antapologie the Moone) as if they were not onely not able to answer it, but as if they knew not so much as which way to goe about to answer it: as if they who mean to answer him, had need to be furnished with other manner of parts, learning, knowledge, wisdome, then were any wayes requisite to answer all the Seraphicall disputants in the world besides. Paul himselfe (it seems) with some others, had given out some speeches of his coming to Corinth, some while before he came. And because through occasionall diversions his journey was for some conside∣rable time deferred, some in this Church that were obnoxious, were puffed up (it seems) as if the bitternesse of death had been past, and Paul never meant to come amongst them. Some (saith hee) are
puffed up, as though I would not come unto you 1 Cor. 4. 18.. But he cuts the comb of this their confidence in the next words, by acquainting them with his resolution in that behalfe. But (saith he) I will come unto you shortly, if the Lord will, and will know not the words of them which are puffed up, but their power Verse 19.. Because an answer to his Antapologie hath been so much spoken of, and through many interruptions fol∣lowing like the waves of the Sea one in the neck of another, hath not yet been brought forth, therfore the man is so far swoln & puffed up with conceit, as if the world were not wide enough to containe him. But the answer which he calls for with so much fiercenesse of importunity, will ere long (if the Lord will) be with him: and the world shall know, not what the words are, (for these are big enough, & known unto the world already) but what the power is (or weak∣nesse rather) of the Antapologie. There were some sonnes of Belial, and yet sonnes of Confidence too, among the Jewes, in the dayes of the great provocation of that nation, when the day of that soare judgement of the 70. yeares captivity drew neere, and was even at the doores, who (it seems) derided the predictions of the Prophets con∣cerning the judgement, and were so confident as to desire and call for that day of the Lord, (under which expression the Prophets of the Lord were wont to forewarn them of it) as for a treasure. But what saith the Prophet Amos to these? Woe be to you that desire the day of the Lord: to what end is it for you? The day of the Lord is dark∣nesse, and not light Amos 5. 18.. I verily beleeve that the Answer to Mr. Edwards Antapologie, will not be for his honour: in which respect he hath no great ground to be so restlesse or importunate in calling for it; or to insult over those, who have told him once and again, that (if the Lord will) an answer shall be given him. Whereas hee talks of his worthy peece being published 18. months since, he supposeth (it seems) that men have little or nothing to doe, but to attend the motions of his pen, and to expedite and dispatch him out of hand. Indeed if Independent Ministers had either the priviledge of ease, to preach to the bare walls and pews in their meeting-places, or that shamelesnesse of forehead to make the subject matter of their Ser∣mons little else but loose, and lying, and frivolous reports and sto∣ries, or virulent invectives against the Saints and servants of God, (with which kind of materiall, this world, and the God of this world together, will be glad to furnish Preachers at a very low rate, either of time or study, for their building) they might (I confesse)
be men of more expedition in writing, then they are, and be as like the Tree spoken of in the Revelationa, as Mr Edw. himselfe. It is suffi∣cientlyGangrena. Pref. p. 2. knowne, that since the 18 moneths Mr Edwards speaks of, I have given some account unto the world, and that by publique writing, and this more then once, twice, or thrice, (besides my constant and standing labours with those who have committed themselves unto me in the Lord) that I am not so loose, or idly dis∣pos'd, as Mr. Edwards would insinuatingly perswade and possesse the world concerning me (p. 73.) And knowne also it is, though somewhat more privately, that I had given some further account in the same kind, of my time spent, (within the said compasse of 18. moneths) had not the way, by which light and truth should goe forth into the world, been hedg'd up by Clergie-Classique Coun∣sels, as with thornes, against me. But however, I can hardly be∣lieve, that Mr Edwards himselfe, notwithstanding all the advantage of libertie and freedome from other ingagements which he had a∣bove other men, tooke much lesse then 18. moneths time, for the building and beautifying his Antapologie. And who knows not how much more easie it is, to be first in writing, or to object, then to an∣swer; according to the common saying in the Schooles, Plura porest interrogare Asinus, quàm respondere Aristoteles: i. An asse may soone aske more questions, then Aristotle be able to answer? In the latter part of his Preface, he arms himselfe with constancieSect. 15. and heroique resolution, to triumph and rejoyce in what he shall suffer in way of hatred or reproach from the Sectaries, for his faithfull and noble service done both to Heaven and Earth in opposing them; animating and flattering himselfe in his course, with this, that in case he shall suffer in this kind, he shall ride parallel in the trium∣phant Chariot of honour with those great worthies of the world, Calvin, Luther, and Austine; yea with the Apostle Paul himselfe; nay, with the great Lord of all the Apostles & Patriarchs, the Lord Christ himselfe, blessed for ever. See the 4, 5, and 6 pages of his Preface. But poore man! little doth he consider, how diametrally opposite he is in his cause and course, both to Christ and Paul; and how unlike those other men. Was either Paul or Christ, of his oc∣cupation? did they spend their time, or ingage their friends, in ga∣thering up vagrant, loose, scandalous and lying reports against the Saints, and servants of God, under the names of Sectaries, to blesse
the vanitie and wickednesse of the world with the venting of them? Did Paul or Christ, set their faces like an Adamant, to inflame and set on fire the Powers of this world, with hatred, bitternesse and bloudinesse of spirit, against the sons and daughters of God, though full of weaknesse, and unworthy in the highest? Or did they impor∣tune and clamour upon the secular arme, even to the wearying of it, to avenge them on their adversaries; and little lesse then threaten those in place and Authoritie, if they would not comport with them in their carnall ends and desires, and lift up their iron rod to breake their enemies in pieces like a potters vessell? This, (saith Christ to the Jewes, speaking of their murtherous attempts against him) this did not Abraham Joh. 8. 40.. Nor did the Lord Christ, or his blessed Apostle any of the things mentioned: but whether Mr. Edw. hath done any thing else (almost) either in his Lion, or in his Beare, I mean either in his Antapologie, or in his Gangrene, especially in this latter, I ap∣peale to the judgements and consciences of all, that either have, or shall please diligently to peruse them, and withall have but their wits and senses free from Classique bands. When the Lord Christ was sollicited by some of his disciples, and that by those whom he loved best, to call for fire from Heaven to consume those that would not receive him, he turn'd himself, and rebuked them, telling them that they knew not what spirit they were of. Whereas Mr. Edwards calls and cries, might and maine, for fire from Hell to destroy, not those who refuse to receive the Lord Christ, but such as do receive him with all their hearts, and with all their souls, onely because their faces are not in∣stantly set to receive the Traditions of his Discipline and Doctrine; and yet conceits that he knows well enough of what spirit he is, ma∣king no question for conscience sake, but that it is Heavenly. And for Paul, we know he burnt (viz. griefe and sorrow) when any Christi∣an, though never so weake, was but offended: his Doctrine and de∣sire was, that supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks, be made for all men: for Kings and all that are in Authoritie, that wee [Christians & believers, of what judgement soever, for he excludes none] may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godlinesse and honestie 2 Tim. 2. 12.. But Mr. Edwards is so far from burning when weake Christians are offended, that he is offended, when they burne not. His Doctrine, Pra∣ctise, and desire is, that supplications and prayers, intercessions and gi∣ving of thanks, be made for, and to, Kings and all in Authoritie, that
Christians and believers may either not live at all, or at least be so far from leading quiet and peaceable lives in godlinesse and honestie, as to have their faces ground, and their bones broken, and their hearts fill'd with heavinesse, unlesse they will receive the Clergie-Classique Faith, as well as the Faith of the Lord Jesus Christ himselfe. O mi∣serable man! who shall deliver him from this dangerous snare of death; I meane of conceiting himself like unto Paul and Jesus Christ, in the course he steer's against Sects and Errors! And as for Calvin, Luther, and Austin, though these had much more flesh and bloud in them, then the two former had; yet for him to strengthen his hand in the way he goes, by their example, is as if a murtherer should in∣courage himselfe in his way, from the practise of a Surgeon when he lets bloud, or the proceedings of a Judge, when he slayes a malefa∣ctor with a sentence of death. For when, or in what age of the world did any of these spread the world round about them with snares of intelligence, in every place, to catch the failings, and halt∣ings and infirmities of the Saints; and when they had taken a pro∣portion of them, to spread a table with them to entertaine and feast the prophane world? Especially when did any of these, ever publish such a rhapsodie, of loose, light, lying reports and tales, all or the greatest part of them calculated for the shame of the Saints, and glo∣ry of the Sons of Belial? Or when did any of them deale so impor∣tunely or imperiously with those, whom God had set in Authoritie over them, to crush the generation of the righteous, the lambs of Je∣sus Christ, under the names of Sectaries, only because in some things they held not conformitie in judgement with them? I doe not all this while say, that either Mr. Edwards writing, or printing, or preaching, against errors, heresies, or Sectaries, is that, which sim∣ply makes him unlike either unto Christ, or Paul, or those others named; for doubtlesse they did, interpretatively at least, all this; and who hath not ingagements upon him, to go thus far both with him and them, if he be able, and hath opportunitie? But first, the blaspheming many Truths of God, under the names of errors and heresies (a stone at which his pen frequently dasheth) maketh him extremely unlike unto Christ and Paul; yea and unto those others also, except onely in their failings. Secondly, his turning himselfe, especially with that fiercenesse of countenance, and furiousnesse of importunitie, upon the Civill Magistrate, to provoke men of this
Interest, to powre out themselves in wrath and indignation upon all those, whom he thinks good to make Delinquents by his pen. Thirdly, His sending forth of Emissaries (wherein, thorough a mis∣take of the word Independents, in stead of Presbyterians, he chargeth the Independents to resemble the Jesuites) to discover, and report unto him, the slips and weaknesses of the servants of God. Fourthly, His inveteratenesse, and Dragon-likenesse of spirit, by which he manageth all his endeavours against Errors and Sectaries. Fifthly, His importune confidence, and overgrowne presumption of his own parts, learning, knowledge. Sixthly, His drinking in with so much greedinesse, all, and all manner of reports, that are brought in to him, whether with ground or without, that will but make dirt to throw in the faces of those, whose understandings are either longer or shorter then his, be they otherwise as deare to him whose Name is jealous, as the apple of his eye. Seventhly and lastly, His virulent and viperous designe, to preach the nakednesse of the Saints, yea the nakednesse of vile and unworthy men (I meane their false, base, and putid suggestions against them) as their nakednesse, upon the house∣top, and to call upon all the world to heare; these things make him so extremely unlike Jesus Christ, and those others whom he pretends to imitate, that that drop of resemblance wherein he par∣takes with them, is quite drown'd and swallowed up in this Great Ocean of dissimilitude. And let Mr. Edwards know, and let his Con∣science and Compeers know, that whatsoever he shall suffer, whe∣ther from his Sectaries or others, in this bloudy negotiation, he shall suffer not as a Christian, nor with Christ, but as a malefactor and an evill doer. But I marvaile with what profound Oracle of policie the manSect. 16. consulted with, about the title of his book, calling it, A Catalogue and discovery of many Errors of the Sectaries. Was it not that tyranni∣call and bloudy principle: Pereant amici, dummodo & inimici una pereant. i. Let friends goe to wreck too, so that enemies may but wreck with them. For certainly, by this title he makes Presbyterians Sectaries, as well as any others. Wherein I should not have faulted him, but onely to shew how that the zeale of High Presbytery, hath eaten him up, and not left him so much of himself, as wherewith to know his friends from his enemies. For if men be therefore Secta∣ries, because they hold such opinions, as he rallieth in his Cata∣logue
under the Name of Errors, I know many Presbyterian Se∣ctaries. First, for that which he makes the 104 error in his Cata∣logue, viz. that Paedobaptisme is unlawfull, it is sufficienrly known, that the strongest shield and buckler wherewith that cause was ever protected, was the workmanship of a Presbyterian hand. So for that opinion, that there is no Scripture against a mans being often baptized (mentioned in the 110th place) it calls a Presbyterian, Master. That the calling and making of Ministers of the Word and Sa∣craments, are not jure divino, &c. which is the 116th. That there is no distinction concerning Government of Ecclesiastical & Civil, &c. (the 141.) are the opinions of one, who professeth himself to be no Separatist a, and then I know not by Mr. Edwards principles,Compassion. Samaritan. p. 4 to make him any thing but a Presbyterian. I know divers of the Presbyterian judgement, as well Regular as Secular, that own the 70th error▪ (so called, or miscalled rather;) viz. That faith in a proper sense is imputed in justification, and that Christs righteousnesse (i his active obedience) is not im∣puted (in the formality of it) in justification; though for his  cre∣dere, it is a patch of his own peecing to the opinion, and is no ex∣pression of theirs, who otherwise are not ashamed of the opinion. To passe by many others of like patronage and relation; that which hee cataloguizeth for the 64. viz. this, That naturall men may doe such things, as whereunto God hath by way of promise annexed grace and acceptation: and that if men improve their naturall abilities to the utmost in seeking grace, they shall find it. I desire to be infor∣med by any understanding man, whether there be not every inch, yea every jot and tittle of the substance of it, asserted by a great Doctor (while he lived) of the Presbyterian Schoole, and who be∣ing dead, yet speaketh much for that way. I mean Mr. John Ball, in his Treatise of the Covenant of Grace, not long since published by M. Simeon Ash. The said Treatise being further subscribed and re∣commended unto the world by five great Masters of the Assem∣bly it selfe, all of them of intemerated fidelity to the Presbyterian Cause; viz. Mr. Edward Reynolds, Mr. Daniel Cawdrey, Mr. Ed∣mond Calamy, Mr. Thomas Hill, Mr. Anthony Burges. In this pas∣sage (p. 44.) of the said Treatise, No man is hindered from beleeving through the difficulty or unreasonablenesse of the command, or through his owne simple infirmity, as being willing and desirous to be∣leeve,
but not able, (which inability deserves pitie) but his inabilitie is of corruption and wilfulnesse: hee doth not beleeve because hee will not: he is unable because he doth not covet or desire, which is inexcuse∣able. Doubtlesse, if no man be hindered from beleeving, either through the difficulty of the command, or through his own infirmity; and all the reason why a man doth not beleeve, is, because hee will not, natu∣rall men by improving their abilities to the uttermost, may be∣leeve, and consequently doe that, whereunto God hath by way of promise annexed grace and acceptation. For hath he not pro∣mised, that he that beleeves shall be saved? or doth not salvation a∣mount to as much, or more, then grace and acceptation? And if men should improve their naturall abilities to the uttermost, and yet not to be able to beleeve, the reason why they doe not be∣leeve, cannot be said to be this, Because they will not: for their will in this case puts forth it selfe to the uttermost, in ingaging men to such an improvement of their abilities. So doubtlesse the same errror (if an error it be) is asserted by Paulus Testardus, Pastor to the reformed Church of Bloys in France, in a Tract called , seu Synopsis Doctrine de Natura & Gratia, published not simply by the permission or licence, but ex mandato, by the command of a whole Synod of the Reformed Churches in the Province of Or∣leance, p. 91. Thesi 121. where hee saith, that God in all the three wayes or methods of calling sinners unto salvation (which he had opened before) doth not onely shew unto the sinner what hee should, or ought to doe, but gives power to all that are invited or called, to performe and doe it, and so to be saved if they will. So that if even he that is cal∣led onely in the most generall manner of all, be not saved, he is inexcuse∣able before God. This Paul expresly teacheth, That (saith hee) which may bee known of God, is made manifest in them (namely the Gentiles,) for God hath made it manifest unto them, that they might bee without excuse before him. But certainly (he inferres) excusable they had been, if they had been fully willing to doe it, and only wanted power Quod in om∣nibus vocandi rationibus Deus peccatori, quid debeat non modo oftendit, sed & omni invitato, vocato det posse illud praestare, & salvari, si velit: adeo ut si non salvatur is, qui generalissimâ tantum ratione in∣vitatus est, sit prorfus inexcusabilis coràm Deo. Id expresse docet Paulus.  (inquit)  manifestum factum est in ipsis, (Gentilibus scilicet) Deus enim manifestum fecit, &c. ita utinex∣cusabiles ipsi sint. At certè, si, etsi maximè voluissent, non potuissent, fuissent excusabiles, &c. Paulus Testardus, Eiren. p. 91. Thesi 121.:
with more of like importance in the seqeul of the same Thesis. So that if M. Edw. wil make this an error, and a brand of a Sectary, to hold, That a man by the uttermost improvement of his natural abilities, may doe that, whereunto God by promise hath annexed Grace and Ac∣ceptation (though all this while I doe not say that I own the opi∣nion) he will involve one whole Synod, not onely with the guilt of the error (which is lesse,) but of an authoritative command, to have the error both printed and published, which is enough to separate between all Synods, and their authority and esteem for ever; yea, and make the crown of Orthodoxisme to fade and languish upon the head of our present Assembly, by arraigning five of the principall members of it at once, as men tainted with the errors of the Sectaries of the time. Therefore let him either strike these opinions mentioned (with many others) out of his Catalogue of errors, or else let him number his own party a∣mongst the Sectaries. To draw towards a conclusion; I shall put a measuring ReedSect. 17. into the hand of the Reader, wherewith to measure the truth and honesty of the Gangrene and her Author, from the one end of both unto the other, made of a straight observation of some croo∣ked passages and relations in the Gangrene, ready to stink for want of the salt of truth. I shall begin with such particulars as concern my self, and close with others of another aspect and re∣lation. First, though hee doth not set my name in the margin againstSect. 18. his 70th error, (p. 25.) as he had done a little before in the same page against another, yet his intent clearly enough was (and I think himself will not deny it) to arraigne the opinion held by me concerning the imputation of faith, and non-imputation of Christs righteousnesse in justification, in my Treatise upon that subject, entituled, Imputatio fidei, for an error Pag. 128. he talkes of farre smaller errors in justification then mine.. Now how falsly and forgingly he represents the opinion, appeares first, in that hee fathers that mungrell expression,  credere upon it, onely because it is an expression ad invidiam comparata, but no where used by me throughout the controversie: yea, p. 91. of the former part of that Treatise Sect. 3. I expresly deny that Faith justifieth as it is an act. Secondly, in that he makes this opinion to say, That the righ∣teousnesse of Christ is not imputed in justification. Whereas I ex∣presly
affirm, (p. 54. of the second part of the Treatise) that in a sense (which I there explain) as well the habituall holinesse of Christs person, as the morall righteousnesse, or active obedience of his life, may be said to be imputed to those that beleeve in him. And very often in the said Treatise, upon occasion, I declare in what sense I admit, as well as in what sense I refuse the righteousnesse or active obe∣dience of Christ in justification. I suppose he is not himself a son of that profound ignorance, as to hold, that the righteousnesse of Christ (as he calls it, whether meaning▪ his active or passive obe∣dience, or both) is in every sense imaginable imputed in justifica∣tion; and yet it's ill presuming of over-much understanding (e∣specially in the point of justification) in him, who going about to rectifie the mistakes of others, shall himself affirm, That the re∣demption and reconciliation purchased by Christ, is the moving and me∣ritorious cause of our justification and salvation: and that the instru∣mental cause whereby the same is imputed, is the bloud of Christ. Of wch▪ Atheologicall and putid assertions, who would have thought that the great Aristarchus of the errors & heresies of the times, could have been the Author and Assertor, had not Mistresse Gan∣graena in the margin of her 22. page betrayed him? But if hee, onely denying the imputation of Christs righteousnesse in justi∣fication in one sense, but asserting it in another, should be simply and indefinitly charged to deny it, would think the charge base and unjust (as indeed hee should have cause to doe,) hee himselfe must bow down his back to the same burden, and bee content to be looked▪ upon as a man of this basenesse, untill hee hath made his atonement with God and men for it. Ex ungue leonem. You may by this one instance judge with what truth or honesty hee hath laid down the rest of the opinions in his Catalogue. Well may he call them errors, when once he hath lift up his pen upon them. Forgery hath a mischievous omnipotency, and is able to create what errors or heresies she pleaseth. Again, p. 45. he chargeth Mr. John Goodwin, that in his pointSect. 19. of justification, he quotes Calvin, Bucer, and others, who are known ex professo to be of another judgement. Surely the man is not either so simple, or free from the guilt of false speaking in this assertion, as his words beare. Doubtlesse he doth not intend to make it a mat∣ter of charge against a man, in the handling of a controversie, to
quote Authors who are known ex professo to be of a judgement dif∣fering from his. How many doth himselfe quote in his Gangrene upon as deplorable terms as these? But the mans meaning is, if he knew how to get it out, that Mr. J. G▪ in his point of justificati∣on, quotes Calvin, Bucer, and others, as being of the same judge∣ment with him, who are known ex professo to bee of another judge∣ment, If this be his sense and charge, either he shewes himselfe to be a very illiterate man, and not able to construe a peece of plain Latin; or else charges Calvin, Bucer, & the reft, wth being of a judg∣ment as contrary to themselves as to me. If he can construe La∣tin, let him confesse in English whether Calvin bee ex professe of a differing judgment from me in the point of justification, in these passages following (to omit very many others of the same im∣port.) Quum autem justiciam in se repositam non habeant homines, im∣putatione hane adipiscuntur, quia Deus fidem illis fert acceptam pro ju∣sticiâ, Calvin in Gal. 3. 6. And again, Quare Abraham credendo nihil aliud quam oblatam sibi gratiam amplectitur, ne irrita sit. Si HOC illi imputatur in justiciam, sequitur non aliter esse justum, nisi quia Dei bonitate consisus, omnia ab ipso sperare audet, Calv. in Rom. 4. 3. FIDES REPƲTATƲR IN JƲSTICIAM, non quod ullum à nobis meritum afferat, sed quia Dei bonitatem ap∣prehendat. Ibidem. Yet again: Quibus etiam verbis doemur, iu∣sticiam Paulo nihil aliud esse quàm remissionem peccatorum. Calvin Rom. 4. 6. Manet ergo salva nobis pulcherrima sententia, iustificari hominem fide, quia gratuita peccatorum remissione coram Deo purga∣tus sit. Ibid. Abraham fidem habuit Iehova: & reputavit id ei iusti∣ciam: hoc est, habuit ei pro iusticia HANC FIDEM. Cre∣dendo igitur id accepit, ut Deus eum pro iusto haberet. Bucer Rom. 4. 3. I forbeare to English these passages, because I desire to make an experiment upon Mr. Edwards, whether he be able to doe it, or no. If he shall publickly acknowledge that he hath a∣bused both me and himselfe, and many more, in charging me with quoting Authors for me, who are known ex professo to be of another iudgement, I shall conceive the better hopes of some competency of a Latin faculty in him; but if he shal stand to avouch a charge of so palpable and manifest untruth, to them that understand the Authors language The Reader for his fur∣ther satisfa∣ction about Calvins iudge∣ment in this controversie, is earnestly desired to per∣use the 11th chapter, as al∣so the 5, 6, & 7. Sections of the fift chap∣ter of the first part of my Treatise of Justification., I professe ingenuously that I know no rea∣son but to judge him uncapable of the English sense of a Latin
sentence. But whether Calvin, Bucer, and those other he speakes of, quoted by me in my point of Justification, be of the same judgement or no, with me in the point, let neither me, nor he, nor Mr Robo∣rough be Judges, (for we very possibly may all be partiall) but let us referre the decision to two sufficient men, and without exception, both for learning, and integritie, and knowledge of the case, the one a foreine Divine, some yeares since at rest with God, never knowne to me; the other a neighbour Minister indeed, and of the Assembly it selfe, but between whom and my selfe, there was never any acquaintance, beyond a casuall enterview, and the exchange of a few words of course. The former of the two is David Pareus, sometimes chiefe Professor of Divinitie in the Universitie in Hei∣delburgh: who in his Tract concerning the Active and Passive Righteousnesse of Christ, having laid downe his judgement (in the Controversie depending) thus, (pag. 176.) that remission of sinnes for the satisfaction of Christ imputed to us, is our whole and intire Justification, and argued accordingly (pag. 177.) in the following page, addeth as followeth; I might here produce the Authorities of the Fathers, who likewise place our righteousnesse (meaning, in Justification) in the alone forgivenesse of sinnes for the death of Christ: and accordingly cites severall testimonies out of Austin, Oecumenius, and Ambrose. And immediately after these testimonies, thus; I might also alledge the consent of Luther, Me∣lancthon, Zuinglius, Oecolampadius, Calvin, Bullinger, Martyr, Mu∣sculus, Hyperius, Ʋrsine, Olenian, &c. from whose doctrine in the point of Justification, I doe not vary a nailes breadth. So that the light of this mans reading and judgement together, could discover no other opinion touching the formall cause of Justification, either in the Fathers, or any of the chiefe Protestant Writers in his time, but that it should stand ONELY in remission of sinnes. The latter of the two mentioned is, Mr Thomas Gataker, a man of approved learn∣ing and integrity amongst us: who in Mr An. Wottons Defence a∣gainst Mr Walkers charge, lately published in Print by him, acknow∣ledgeth (p. 58.) that however he for his part deemeth it erroneous (and so doe I too, taking the word Justification in that large sense which it seemeth he doth where he argueth against the opinion, as viz. in his Animadversions upon the disputes between Piscator and Lucius, p. 9. Besides sundry other places) to hold that Justification
consisteth in remission of sinnes, yet that Calvin, Beza, Olenian, Ʋr∣sine, Zanchie, Piscator, Pareus, Musculus, Bullinger, Fox, and divers others of great note and name, yea whole Synods of ours are found so to say: adding further, And yet were these men never yet, that I ever heard or read, for so saying, condemned as Heretiques, much lesse as blasphemous Heretiques, but had in high esteeme, as their worth, parts, and workes well deserved, by those that therein dis∣sented from them. I trust the servant is not greater then his Ma∣ster; nor the Authoritie of the Clerk, equall to that of the Justice of Peace. If Mr. Gataker hath spoken, I hope Mr. Roborough will hold his peace. And since two such men, as David Pareus and Mr. Thomas Gataker, have so clearly and confidently affirmed, every mouth (I trust) of clamor and contradiction will from henceforth be stopped. For in the mouth of two or three witnesses (saith the Di∣vine Law it selfe) shall every word be established Deut 19. 15. 2 Cor. 13. 1. &c. One affirma∣tive testimony is more valid in Law, then many nega∣tive.: Yea I am not with∣out some hope, but that Mr. Thomas Edwards himselfe, may in time be reduced, though I know that in clamorous and aspersive bicker∣ings, he emulates the glory of that martiall zeale which was in him, who still affected to appeare, Primus inire manu, postremus ponere bellum, i▪ The first to fight, and last to quit the field. Pag. 45. he affirmes, that quoting his Antapologie, and citing theSect. 20. former part of the sentence, I leave out the latter; adding this palpable untruth; that had I but named it, it would have been an evident confu∣tation of me. I clearly prov'd (Sect. 13. of this Answer) that the lat∣ter part of the sentence he speaks of, especially construed with the for∣mer part which I cite, is absolute and complete non-sense. And was any man ever evidently confuted in evident non-sense? except it be in such a sense, as he that drinkes puddle water, confutes him that chooseth rather to drinke at the cleare fountaine or streame. Pag. 67. he chargeth his Sectaries or Independents, that they use toSect. 21. give great and glorious Names, and swelling titles to their bookes, as (for instance) Innocency and Truth Triumphing together, &c. I perceive by his aggrievement at this title, first, that if High Presbyterie be ad∣vanc'd, neither Innocency, nor Truth, are like to triumph: this keene piece of Presbyterie is not able to beare the mention of such things. Secondly, that matters of Truth any wayes tending to the dispa∣ragement of Independency, are very rare, and scarce, and not to be
had for love or money. For otherwise, (doubtlesse) the man would not have plaid at so small game, would not have strain'd himself to catch at this flie. As much love as a single half-peny, would have serv'd to have cover'd this Transgression. What? not so much li∣bertie meet to be allowed to Independents, as to give what Names they think best to their bookes, without a Synodicall debate, and permission? I confesse, Gangraena, is no Great or glorious Name, but it is a title swelling with poyson, and the gall of aspes. But for me, I shall take no offence at it: the proverb is but fulfilled, Similes habent labra lactucas; like lips, like lettuces. Both title and booke (I pre∣sume) are savoury meat to those for whom they were prepared, and such as their soules love, as marrow and fatnesse. But what rea∣son he hath to call Innocencie and Truth Triumphing together, either a great and glorious Name, or swelling Title, wee desire to gather from the Tree of paradise the next moneth of her fructification. In the mean season, Mr Edwards must suffer as an unjust asperser in this charge also. Pag. 54. He chargeth Mr. John Goodwin, in a Sermon to have ut∣teredSect. 22. that against the Parliament, and the power of it, as opens a gap to all slighting of their Authoritie and power: and further addeth, that he believes there was never any such speech from any before himselfe. But first, if any such gap (as he speaks of) be opened, I know no wild beasts that have broken in at it, but some such Presbyterians, who (as I heare) demanded, What hath the Parliament to doe with Inferior Courts? And who charge some of the worthy members thereof, to be hereticall and factious; yea ninnies and grolls, and men that have no more wit, then will reach from their nose to their mouth, and are onely sen∣sible. I confesse in respect of such Presbyterian spirits as these, there had need be no gap opened to the slighting of Parliamentarie Authoritie and power: and that the Parliament it selfe had need keepe power out of such hands, which without it know how to be Imperious enough. But secondly, it is so far from being true, that I in the Sermon he speaks of, have uttered any thing against the Parliament or power of it; much more, any thing which opens any gap to all slighting of their Authoritie and power; that he himselfe in this charge against me, dasheth his foote against the stone he speaks of. For first, that which he insinuates as uttered by me of such a consequence, is no∣thing else but manifest and cleare truth; yea and hath passed the
triall of Presbyterian fire it selfe, and is come forth in full weight, without suffering the least damage or detriment by it. Secōdly, most certain it is, that no Truth whatsoever hath any prejudiciall or en∣damaging influence upon any just and lawfull Authoritie; for God is not divided in, or against himselfe. Therefore he that shall affirme, that any Authoritie or power whatsoever, is any waies endangered, prejudic'd, or disparaged by any Truth, doth by an unavoidable consequence, denie that Authoritie or power to be lawfull, or from God. Nor could Mr. Edwards lightly have uttered any thing, that would have strooke more dangerously at the very roote of all Par∣liamentarie Authoritie and power, then to say, that he that speakes the truth, speaks against them, and opens a gap to all slighting of them. But thirdly (and lastly) let Mr. Edwards and his abettors in this charge know, that it is not they who speake the Truth, whether to Parliament or Princes, that open a gap to the slighting of their Autho∣ritie or power; no: but they are the men of this demerit and impietie, who for their own ends flatter them, and have their persons in admi∣ration for advantage; who straine their wits and consciences toge∣ther, to lift them up nearer to the Heavens then God will beare, that so they may be masters of an opportunitie and power, to gra∣tifie them in their carnalls. And the Truth is, that had not God by more then an ordinary hand of grace, both towards themselves, and towards the Nation, made those honorable and worthy Coun∣sellors, wiser then their Teachers; Satan had a most dangerous ad∣vantage against them, to have made them more unwise then their enemies. Page 73. He chargeth the Independents, That many of them play atSect. 23. Cards and Tables, are very loose on the Sabbath dayes, goe to Bowls and other sports on dayes of publick Thankesgiving, as Mr. Iohn Good∣win, and severall of his Church, &c. Whether his intent be to ju∣stifie and make good the first and second branches of this charge, viz. the Independents playing at Cards and Tables, and their loosness on the Sabbath dayes, by the instance of Mr. Iohn Goodwin and seve∣rall of his Church, I will not determine. Certain I am, that accor∣ding to the common rules of construction, his words import it, and I beleeve that not one Reader of ten but so understands him. If this be his sense, abhorred of all men be his lying: for Mr. Iohn Goodwin neither playes at Cards nor at Tables; neither hath he done
either since his first comming to the Citie, nor of many yeares before; nor doth he know any of his Church addicted to either of these recreations. But however, I marvell the man should think to burthen the Independents with these exercises of Cards and Ta∣bles, when as it is so generally known, of what light account, and generall use they are in the best reformed Presbyterian Churches. And if there bee any of the Independent way so much addicted to them, as Mr. Edwards charge seems to import, I beleeve they are chiefly, if not onely, those whom Mr. Edwards calls Malig∣nants, complaining of them for falling to this way; and who lately drank of the same waters of Episcopacie with the far grea∣test part of the Presbyterian party, and now accompany them in their schisming or rending off from that way. And (alas!) who knowes not how hard a thing it is for men that have a long time drunk old Wine with their old Friends, presently to drink new? For his charge of loosnesse on the Sabbath dayes, the net of Inde∣pendency, like that of the Gospel (as it seems by the many bitter complaints made by Mistresse Gangraena in that behalfe) gathering fishes of every kind, good and bad Mat. 13. 47▪ 48., and that in such abundance, as the tenor of the said complaints imports, I am not able to speak for the whole circumference. But for M. I. Goodwin and severall of his Church, who are the onely persons in whom instance is given to make good the truth of the charge, we desire that when his great labours of powring out the Viall upon the Sun be over, he will please to refresh himselfe with telling out the story at large, with the particularities of it, viz. on what Sabbath, or Sabbaths it was, whether before Saint Ieffrey or after, that either himselfe or his Informers saw that loosnesse in Mr. Iohn Goodwin and severall of his Church, and what loosnesse it was, and who of his Church they were, that transgrest this transgression with him. For my part, I shall not goe about to justifie my selfe, or all of my Church from more loosnesse then well becomes us, on such dayes; but I know no loosnesse comparable to that, when Ministers of the Gospel, (whether such, or so called by themselves) shall take liberty un∣der the name of preaching to vent vagrant, loose, light, lying tales and reports, on purpose to defame the good wayes and ser∣vants of God; or else to make lowd challenges to all the world,
to make good what they deliver, and yet shrink and decline the incounter with a few plain conscientious men. Doublesse neither Mr. Iohn Goodwin, nor any of his Church, ever trespassed the trespass of any such loosnesse as this on any Sabbath day; nor of any other equall in demerit to it. But though hee should cavill himselfe off from the charge of charging, either Mr. Iohn Goodwin or any of his Church, either with playing at Cards and Tables, or with loosnesse on Sabbath dayes, yet he must own the charging of them with going to Bowles, and o∣ther sports, on dayes of publick Thankesgiving. Therefore, first, be∣cause he speaks of dayes in the plurall number, as of many; we de∣sire him, that in the next return of his monethly course upon him, he will throughly purge himselfe from all malignancy in this particular of his charge, by naming those dayes of publick Thankesgiving wherein this hainous offence (but against no com∣mandment or law, either of God or Man) was committed. Wee cannot allow it, no not by his own law for a sufficient come-off, to say that on such a day of publick Thankesgiving, the men im∣peached trespassed the said impeachment, except he can give in∣stance of the pretended miscarriage in more dayes then one, of that denomination. For himselfe in his Antapologie, p. 54. quar∣rels with his You five (as ever and anone hee calls the Apologists) onely for saying, that some of their brethren in their printed books do candidly testifie of them; telling them (by way of reproof, and charge of untruth in their Assertion) that it is but one of them, not some that doe so testifie. Therefore by his own rule, an assertion of the plurall number cannot be justified by a single instance or ex∣ample of what is plurally asserted. And yet who knowes not the very law of Nature allowes a man a greater indulgence of phrase and expression in his own purgation, then it doth in char∣ging or impeaching others? Secondly, wee desire of our grand-accuser, the next time hee comes amongst us with his monethly visitation, to let the world know, what other sports they are that Mr. Iohn Goodwin, and some of his Church use to go unto on dayes of publick thankesgiving, besides Bowles: they are not conscious to themselves of transgressing ei∣ther in Bowles or in any other sports on such dayes. Thirdly (and lastly) we desire of him for the further vindi∣cation
of himselfe in this charge, when it shall next bee with him after the manner aforesaid, that hee will please to speak it out, that the world may hear, on what day of publick Thanksgiving, about what time or houre of the day, whether fore-noon, or after∣noon; whether in the morning, or in the evening it was that Mr. Iohn Goodwin, with severall of his Church went, or on such dayes are wont to goe to Bowles and other sports. For if it were on the eve∣ning of such a day, that the deed was done, it is no clean strain to say it was done in the day it selfe, especially except some notice were given in the margin, that he chargeth by the day naturall, not artificiall. And besides, if it proves but an evening transgressi∣on▪ the constant practice of the gravest Presbyterians themselves, going to see the Fire works usually made in severall places of the Citie, on every fifth of November, being the most ancient, and ho∣norable day of publick thankesgiving unto the Nation, will be an abundant atonement for it. But (Reader) that thou maist understand ab ovo ad mala, from the top to the toe, the nature and tenor of that grand delinquen∣cie in point of loosnesse, which is here charged upon Mr. John Goodwin and severall of his Church, the story truly and briefly is this: Vpon the day ordered by Authority for publick Thanks∣giving unto God for his gracious and good hand upon the new Modell in the victory at Nazeby the last Summer, having preach∣ed somewhat long, and to wearines in Michaels Cornhill in the fore-noon, and being hereby somewhat indisposed to further la∣bour that day, I kept my house privatly in the afternoon, till a∣bout five or six of the clock. At which time two of the brethren comming in, and finding me in no better posture, desired me to walk out a little into the fields with them, suggesting that a walk in the fresh aire might doe me some good. So a walk we took, the season being pleasant and faire; and having walked about a quarter of a mile, or very little more, and being now upon retur∣ning, one of those that were with me told the other and my selfe, that if we thought good to ease our selves a little before wee re∣turned, there was a garden-house of a friend of his (a man fami∣liarly known also to my self and the other, though of a differing judgement from us in point of discipline) neere at hand, and that if we pleased we might step in thither, and repose our selves
for a while. Comming into the garden, we betook our selves to an Arbour, and there fate about halfe an houre. During which time (and I know not how long before) there was a company playing at Bowles in a little Alley in the Garden; whom (I pre∣sume) we shall not wrong in case we judge them Presbyterians, though (I confesse) wee did not examine them upon the point. But before this company had given over their exercise, there came into the Garden to us some more of our acquaintance, some of them of our, others of them of M. Edwards judgement in point of Church-government. When the company that all this while had been bowling, quit their ground, one in our company, (I re∣member not who, or of what judgement) asked mee if I would not stirre my self a little by casting a Bowle before I went home. The motion being made, and the rest inclining to it, wee went, whether 6 or 8, of us, I doe not remember; but that the one part was Presbyterian, and the other Independent, I perfectly remem∣ber, and betook our selves for about halfe an houre to the exer∣cise; the Sun by this time being either down, or very neere it; and so returned home. This is the story of that drop of water which M. Edwards hath got upon the tip of his finger to cool his tongue, being (as it seems) grievously tormented in the flames of passi∣on and indignation, that the world should no more wonder after the Presbyterians for holinesse and religion, then to think that the Independents had equall part and fellowship with them therein. But let us animadvert a few things upon the story before wee leave it. First, it is very observeable that the man, who (it seems) holds correspondency with the world, and with all parts in the Kingdome, to receive intelligence of all the miscarriages and undue deportments of all such as are independently given, is notwithstanding necessitated for the carrying up his great de∣signe of their defamation, to article against them supposed mis∣carriages and misdemeanors, in stead of those that are truly and really such. Mr. Edwards I presume knowes, that where there is no Law, there is, there can be, no sin, no transgression Rom. 4. 15.: For that sin (all sin) is a transgression of some Law 1 John 3. 4.. Now then till Mr. Edwards shall produce some law either of God or Man, against which Mr. Iohn Goodwin and those of his Church hee speakes of, trespassed in bowling as aforesaid, (which I know hee will not bee able to doe
till the day after doomsday) it must be acknowledged that all their offence and miscarriage therein, amounts to no more, then onely to an unhappy occasion of causing Mr. Edwards to give testimony unto them, whilst his heart was up to dishonor them. Secondly, it is considerable, that as there were some of Mr. John Goodwins Church: so there were some (and, as I remember, more) of Mr. Edwards his Church also, (I mean of the Church of England) who were involved in that innocent transgression of playing at Bowles; yea, the owner of the Garden and Alley, a godly and honest man, and competently warm in the Presbyteri∣anThe Proverb saith, Is is an evill bird that defileth his own nest. way, was partaker with them in the supposed oversight. But (as was said before) his Maxime is, Pereant amici dummodo & ini∣miciuna pereant. Let us bespatter our enemies, what ever becomes of our friends. Thirdly, for my selfe, I neither so much as handled a Bowle for many months, (I think I might truly say, for some years) before; nor have I done it since: nor would I then have drunk this cup of cold water, could I have thought the weaknesse of any brother so great, as to be offended at it. But now perceiving the Presbyterian weaknesse to be so excessively and importunely great as it is, I doe hereby, in the word of a Minister of the Gospel, secure Mr. Edwards, and all his tender retinue, that I wil drink no more any such waters, I mean cast a Bowle on a day or night of publick thanksgiving, whilst the world stands, lest I should offend them. But Fourthly, if I had a mind to demand a tooth for a tooth, I could call some Presbyterian starres by their names, and those of the first magnitude, who upon a day of publick thanksgiving, fell every whit as far from heaven, as Mr. I. Goodwin and those of his Church did. Yea, if you sift the Doctorate it selfe of the Assembly, I be∣leeve you wil find a man dropping through your sieve, who with three more (of his com-or sub-Presbyters rather, four Ministers in all) consecrated the greater part (if not the whole) of an after∣noon upon a publick thankesgiving day, to a service that had no more Religion in it, then the Fishermans daily occupation and imployment: nor did their exercise (it seems) receive any great testimony from heaven, they ate but very little of the labour of their hands; two Roaches (as saith the History) being all that Providence and they could agree upon for the reward of their
afternoone service. But Presbyterians (I perceive) have a priviledge asserted to steale horses, without sin: but poore Independents must not have so much as a Toleration to look on. And if Mr. Edwards will not take faire warning when it is given him, and give over telling tales of Independents, I know who is resolv'd to sift the fore-mentio∣ned heap yet neerer to the bran: and to make the world judge, whether Presbyterian mistakes in the night, be not far worse then In∣dependent bowlings on dayes (or evenings rather) of publick Thanks gi∣vings. Yea I know who hath a story of a Presbyterian Angel, which doth but waite for the opening of Mr. Edwards mouth in reproa∣ches and slanders against his Independent Brethren the second time, to clap into it, and stop it for ever. Yea I my self have a Manuscript by me, which came to my hands above a yeare since, concerning Mr. Edwards himself; which discourseth his jugling and indirect walking between the two Townes of Godalmin in Surrey, and Dun∣mow in Essex. The writing will be attested by good hands: and if there be no remedy, will be content to submit it selfe to the Presse. In the meane time, how wofull and sad is the method, wherein the case depending between Presbytery and Independency, must now (it seemes) thorough Mr. Edwards his horrid and portentuous pro∣ceedings, be argued and debated thorough! the arguments on both sides being onely or chiefly, firebrands of Reproaches and Defama∣tions, throwne in faces of the one side by the other. So that that way of the two, which is able to render the sons of her competitresse most odious and hatefull unto the world, must sit as Queene, and weare the Crowne. Mr. Edwards by the method, wherein he hath begun to plead the cause of Presbytery, and threatens to proceed, hath devoted the Names and reputations of all of his owne partie, at least of such of them as are any wayes obnoxious, to the univer∣sall abhorring both of the present, and future ages. Therefore it concernes all Presbyterians in generall, and the Doctorage of this way more particularly, that are any wayes conscious, to heale the Gangrene of his pen, & to restraine the further spreading of it: other∣wise their Names and Reputations are but so many dead corpses. 5. Whilst Mr. Edwards so conscientiously refraineth from cast∣ing a bowle upon the evening of a Thankesgiving day, and takes li∣bertie to recreate himself with revilings and bitter speakings against the wayes and servants of God in the heart and strength of such
dayes, (as his manner is too too frequently to doe) doth he not straine out gnats, and swallow camels? and run parallel in practise with those Priests & people, who refused to goe into the common hall, left they should be defiled Joh. 18. 28.; but fear'd no defilement from prosecuting that Just One, even unto death? Yea doth he not by such distincti∣ons as these, imitate the temper and spirit of the Goddesse Diana among the Heathen, who (as Iphigenia in Euripides saith of her) was wont to drive from her altar, as uncleane, whoever did but touch a woman in childbed, or a person slaine; and yet delighted to have men slaine in sacrifice unto her? 6. (And lastly) May it not be some Question, whether the par∣ticularitie of that day of publique Thanksgiving, wherein Mr. Edwards finds Mr. John Goodwin and some of his Church so tardie, might not occasion him to sift the Independents more narrowly on that day, then on many others? It was said of King Philip, that though he lo∣ved the treason, yet he hated the Traytor. So wee have many spirits a∣mongst us who love victories, and yet doe little lesse then hate the victors, I meane those by whom it pleaseth God to give many of these unto them. Mr. Edwards administers a strong ground of sus∣pition, that he himself is a man of this dark complexion, in the last page (save one) of his Dedicatory Epistle, where, having first strip'd himself nak'd of all principles of reason and ingenuitie, he thus shamelesly bespeakes the two Honourable Houses of Parliament. And who knows but that all these victories are sent to take away all ex∣cuse, to answer this objection, and to encourage you to this work? The work he speaks of, and whereunto he supposes that no man can be igno∣rant, but that the Parliament are incouraged from God by those ma∣ny victories which he hath given them, is (as appeares by the tenor and straine of the whole Epistle) the crushing and utter undoing of all those, whose consciences cannot submit to the Lawes of Pres∣bytery in all things appertaining to God. So then, it being generally knowne, that many considerable persons, whom God hath hono∣red, by making them eminently instrumentall in the victories he speaks of, cannot presbyterialize in things of God; that which he saith to the Parliament in the words mentioned, being interpre∣ted, is this; Who knows but that the many victories, which God hath gi∣ven you, were intended by him as a means of incouragement unto you, to quash and crush the greatest part of those men, who were signally in∣strumental
and serviceable both to God and them in the obtaining of them, together with all those that adhere in judgement to them in the land. Now the spirit of the man being so extremely incom∣portable with the honour, comfort, or peace of many of those who were prime Actors in the service at Naseby, lest the valour and faith∣fulnesse of these men being commended by God unto the Nation with such remarkable successe, should plead with too nigh an hand the goodnesse of the way wherein they serve and worship God, in the minds and thoughts of the generalitie of men, he (probably) conceiv'd that the best way to prevent this misery from coming up∣on him, was to inquire out how men professing the same way with them, behav'd themselves on that day, whereon publique Thankes were to be given unto God for that victory: that so in case any un∣seemly or unworthy thing could be found out and charged upon any of them, as on this day, the divulging of it, might help to break the strength and interest of that other plea in the minds of men. Page 70. He observes, that two of my children were taken away by theSect. 24. plague of pestilence, upon the making my house a meeting for the Sectaries. That two of my children were taken away, by that hand of God he speaks of, others so reporting it besides Mr. Edwards, (for touching the manner or means of their taking away, I know nothing but by report, my selfe having been far absent severall weeks, when God took them away) I shall not denie. And if he had staid his pen and clos'd the period here, he had wrought little lesse then a miracle; for he had uttered one whole sentence of Truth. But now he may take up the Poets lamentation; Sed mea me in culpam nimirùm fata trahebant: the spirit that attends him, (it seems) envied him the crown of that glory. For in saying, that this was done upon making my house a meeting for the Sectaries, he makes the sentence like unto its fellows, I meane void of Truth. For first, my house is a solid substance; whereas Mr. Edwards meeting is a fluid accident. I never heard of an house, that was made a meeting till now. And if mine be transformed into such a thing, doubtlesse Mr. Edwards hath done it by some magique in∣cantation; I have done no such thing to it my self. But it is the mans unhappinesse to be ever and anon tardie, in non-sense, as well as in non-truth.
2. If his meaning be, that I have made a meeting place of it, whe∣ther for Sectaries, or whosoever, he doth not herein neither nick the Truth. For if by my house, he means, my dwelling house, consisting of that building and roomes, wherein I keepe and converse daily with my familie, (which is the ordinary acception of the word) this is no wayes altered by me since my coming to it. Or 3. If his meaning be, that I have ordered and disposed some part of the buildings which I have hired, with an intent to have Sectaries meet there; neither yet doth the man or his meaning agree with the Truth. I confesse one roome in these buildings, is ordered with an intent that such persons who thinke it worth their time to attend my ministery, whether Presbyterians or others, may be some wayes accommodated to partake thereof. But that I ever made it, or in∣tended to make it, a meeting-place for Sectaries, well may it be one of Mr Edwards assertions, but Truth it is none. Nor doe I know any sort of persons that ever met in it yet, that any whit more de∣serve the denomination of Sectaries, then the Presbyterians them∣selves. But 4. (And lastly) If the mans meaning be, (which is simply the best construction can be made of his words) that I have permitted and given way, that some part of the buildings which I have taken, should be us'd by such persons, as in his mis-carrying dialect are called Sectaries, to meet in; neither will this relieve him against the habituated foulnesse of his pen, or make the sentence cleane. For it was not upon that permission or grant of mine, that my two children were taken away, nor yet upon the furnishing of the roome for con∣veniency of meeting, (for the Sectaries he speaks of, both Presbyte∣rians & others, had met therein severall times before the least haire of the heads of either of the children fell to the ground) but it was upon my deserting and disuse of it for a longer time, then God (it seems) was well pleased with; at least if I should look upon the ta∣king them away, as a stroake of anger or displeasure from God. But as touching the Providence it selfe about my children, whether I should look upon it as having more of mercie, or more of judge∣ment in it, I am not satisfied to this day. Though the children (I con∣fesse) were deare unto me, & their lives very desireable, upon hopes that God (howsoever) would have provided for them, if he had thought it meet they should live; yet considering that the best part
of that livelihood and means of subsistence which I had, was by a strong hand taken from me, I could not so much look upon the ta∣king of them away by God, as a taking them away from me, as from that misery, whereunto the undeserved hatred and injustice of my Presbyterian neighbours, in wresting and detaining my means from me, had exposed them. Men took away my means; and God made up the breach (in part) by diminishing my charge. Neither were they taken away alone: there was a greater number of children ta∣ken away out of a Prebyterian familie neere to them, by the same hand of God; where yet there was no meeting-place made for Sectaries. And besides, I could soone be out of Mr. Edwards debt for this sto∣ry concerning two of my children being taken away; by telling him of three Grave men (and two of them Great) who were principall Actors in my troubles and ejection, taken away by death since the good service they did to the Presbyterian partie in that transaction. God hath cut off both head and taile of those my adversaries: But I leave Mr Edw. to make observatiōs upon it: for my part, I make none. I have now perfected reckonings and accounts between Mr. Ed∣wardsSect. 25. and my selfe, and have set straight the foule errors and falsi∣fications of his bookes in these. I have yet another small parcell of accounts to cleare with him in the behalfe of others: and by that time I shall have issued these, though I shall be very briefe in this transaction, yet I feare I shall make him uncapable of any Quietus est for ever. For doubtlesse the man hath sold himselfe to write all, and all manner of untruths that he can but scrapple together, from what mouths or tongues or pens he cares not, so they be but Pres∣byterian in their constitution, and carry any antipathie in them ei∣ther to the honour or peace of Independencie. I presume that Mris Gangraena hath not as yet paid me the tith or tenth part of her for∣geries: it is like in time shee will be more honest in this, and I shall receive knowledge of the whole substance of her iniquitie. I shall begin this latter account, where Mr. Edwards wel-nighSect. 26. makes an end; with a story related by him in the very last leafe, (save one) of his booke, viz. p. 181. concerning one Cosens of Rocbe∣ster in Kent. By the way, if the common Proverb, which saith, That the best is at the bottome, takes place in his Booke; forgery of forge∣ries, and all is forgery, all over it. For in this Relation, (by which you may judge both of those many that goe before it, and those few
that follow after it) there are wel-nigh, quot verba, tot mendacia: and yet even this also hath this banner of confidence displayed be∣fore the face of it; I was enformed for certaine: upon which preface we shall animadvert presently. First, His Relation here reports, that one Cosens of Rochester in Kent, that Jesus Christ was a Bastard. Hoc primum: let this be the first lie in this Catalogue: the man never said it. 2. This report avoucheth, that the said Cosens said, that if Jesus Christ were upon the Earth againe, he would be ashamed of many things he then did. This is another of the same, and the second in order. For neither did the man speake any such words as these; the wit∣nesse, upon whose single testimony, (originally) both these and the former words were charged upon him, upon reexamination, and that upon oath, before the Committee of the Countie, wav'd both the one and the other; as appeares by the said Examination under the hand of the Clerk of the said Committee, which I saw & read; and is forth-coming for any man to peruse for his satisfaction. 3. This Information of Mr. Edwards affirmes, that the said Co∣sens, for the said Blasphemies, was put into prison in Rochester. Keep tale: this is a third stumble. The occasion of the mans imprisonment, was a matter of a quite differing nature; as by inquiry may be found out by any man; though for some reasons the partie thinketh not so fit to have it printed. 4. The said certain Information informeth; that the said Cosens being committed, at the Sessions there came an Order from some in place to the Recorder to release him. Skore up: this is the fourth word of folly in this Narration. For there came no Order from any in place, nor unto any in place, Recorder or other, for the release of the man; but upon the sight of the fore-mentioned Examination taken upon oath before the Committee, by the Justices, the man was discharged. This untruth may well stand for two (or at least be printed in a Capitall letter) because men of honour and place are aspersed by it, as if they interposed with their interest or power to obstruct the course of Law and Justice. 5. The Information now under impeachment, further averreth, that upon the receipt of the said Order, the Recorder a Serjeant at Law, and a grave man, used these words; Cosens, know you must shortly come before another Court to answer for these words, where you shall have no Order to release you. Tallie on: this is a fift (if not a fift and sixt) phib in the
Relation. For here is a big lye with a lesser in the belly of it. For, first, the Recorder he speaks of, never, upon no occasion, spake any such words as these to the man: nor secondly, did he ever receive any such Order, as is here spoken of; and so could not speake, ei∣ther these words, or any other, upon the receipt of it. 6. This loud-lying Information, further attests, that this man (Cosens) being at libertie, entertaines in his house the Sectaries that come from London, or other places into those parts, as Den, Lamb, Wood∣man, &c. Keep tale; this is a sixt flaw (at least) in the certain Informa∣tion. For the man professeth that he knows no such man, as Wood∣man; nor that (to his knowledge) he ever saw the face of the man. 7. (And lastly) The said Presbyterian Information, for unifor∣mitie sake, that it may end as it began, affirmes (in the cloze of it) that this Cosens is so bold, that he dares threaten to question and trouble godly Orthodox Presbyteriall Ministers, and goes to some of their Chur∣ches to see if he can get any matter against them: for example, he hath gone to one Mr. Clares, a godly Minister, and threatened upon hearing him to complaine of him, and put in Articles against him. Remember the ac∣count: for this is the seventh and eighth time (at least) that the In∣formation prevaricateth with the Truth. For first, the man is so far from daring to threaten to question or trouble any godly Minister what∣soever, that he professeth it to be his judgement, that neither god∣ly, nor ungodly, whether Ministers or others, ought to be questio∣ned or troubled for their judgements in matters appertaining un∣to God. Therefore secondly, though he confesseth that he went to Mr Clare upon the preaching of a Sermon, and told him that he had not delivered the Truth; yet that he any wayes threatned Mr. Clare, he absolutely denieth. I find nothing more to be excepted against in this Information of the 9th of February, as matter of untruth: the reason (I conceive) is, because there is no more of it. This Coun∣ter-Information, I had from the mouth of the said Cosens himselfe, and have the particulars under his hand. Now though there be never a sentence (scarce a clause or piece of a sentence) true in all this Relation, yet it hath Mr Edwards seale upon it, and this foundation; I WAS INFORMED FOR CERTAIN: But first, by this specialtie of honour, I was infor∣med for certain, bestowed upon this Relation, doth he not plainly grant and imply, that he was informed of many other things in his Gangrene, for uncertain? If he had been informed of the greatest part
of them for certain untruths, his Information had been orthodox, and no guile found in the lips of it. But secondly, If Mr. Edwards signall and choice reports, of which he was informed for certain, be of so dark and dismall a complexion, that there is scarce so much as one beame, or the least glimmering of the light of Truth in the whole body of some of them, what shall we think of those that have no such image or superscription of con∣fidence upon them? If his Chariots and Horsemen faile, surely his Infantery will yeeld the field. 3. (And lastly) I would gladly understand, by what character of difference the man discernes between his Informations for certain, and those that are but of vulgar repute with him, and for which he alloweth three graines of non-beliefe: I suppose such as come from his godly Orthodox Presbyterian Ministers, he holds for certain: those which come from hands whose heads have not been anointed with the hands of Consecration, more ambiguous and doubtfull; and yet certain enough to be reported and spread, if their faces be but set against Independency. But who is Mr Edwards godly Orthodox Presbyte∣rian Minister? Is he not such an one, who works stoutly at the forge, and feeds both himself & the world with all manner of scandals and falshoods against the Independents, without feare? We have reason to judge so by the rule of proportion. For p. 57. he pronounceth a man, a Person Religious, and well-affected to the Parliament, only upon occa∣sion of a Letter written by him, full fraught with false and foule sto∣ries and insinuations against his Sectaries; who is look'd upon by men as godly, and as judicious as Mr. Edwards, yea and who have better opportunitie to know the spirit and wayes of the man, in re∣ference to both those particulars, then he; by such (I say) this man is look'd upon, as a man no wayes deserving either of those com∣mendations, except it be by the figure ; as will appeare (in part) by a Letter, whereof we shall give a copie before we end. You have seene the man like himselfe in a Kentish storie: let us crosse the water, and see whether wee can finde him in any better shape on this side. Pag. 78. & 79. He tells you a long formall story of one Nichols, living about Moore-fields, that comes into Stepney-Parish to draw away people: That to Mr. Greenhils face did justifie and maintain many wicked opinions, &c. Ʋpon occasion whereof there was a meeting concluded, and Mr. Greenhill and Mr. Burroughs, with many others, were at it. Hee tells you further when this meeting
was, viz. a little before Mr. Burroughs fell upon the preaching of the power of the Magistrate in matters of Religion. And further a∣dorns the relation with many good words that Mr. Greenhill should speak at this meeting; with others that Mr. Burroughs should speak, as particularly, that in regard of these things, matters being so, there was a necessity both of the government of the Church, and of the power of the Magistrate, &c. As likewise with others that should be spoken by divers others there present. This story is long, and the particular forgeries in it numerous beyond mea∣sure. In which respect I shall desire the Reader at his leasure to make the computation, which he may do with exactnes enough, if he shall please to compare Mr. Edwards Relation with these en∣suing lines which I received from Mr. Burroughs himself in wri∣ting, anent the businesse: That story Mr. Edwards hath, page 79. of one Nichols, and of a meeting concluded of, occasioned by some vise opinions vented by that Nichols, where Mr. Greenhill and my selfe (he sayes) was, together with divers passages that hee relates came from mee at that meeting, is all false. I know no such man as this Nichols, I never heard there was such a man in the world, till I read it in Mr. Edwards his book. I to this day know of no meeting a∣bout him, or any of his opinions, either intended, desired, or resolved upon, much lesse that there was any such meeting. The next Lords day after Mr. Edwards his book came forth, M. Green∣hill asked me whether I knew of any such meeting with that Ni∣chols: for his part he wondred to see such a thing in Mr. Edwardshis book, for he knew of no such meeting. Thus far M. Burroughs. And because we have had occasion here to mention Mr. Bur∣roughs;Sect. 27. and Mr. Edwards takes occasion p. 33. not onely to deale by him as he doth by his other Sectaries, whose opinions he ar∣raignes (ad placitum) for errors; but seldome either names their persons, or encounters their opinions by argument; whereas hee hath expressed himselfe in both against him; I desire to insert a few lines for the vindication of him that is unjustly charged, by detecting the weaknesse and groundlesnesse of the charge. The opinion wherewith Mr. Burroughes stands there charged amongst the Sectaries, as with an error, is this: Whatsoever errors or mis∣carriages in Religion, the Church should bear withall in men, continuing them still in communion with them, as brethren, these the Magistrates
should beare with in men, continuing them in the Kingdome or Com∣monwealth, in the enjoyment of the liberty of Subjects. But first it is to be considered, that Mr. Burroughes, p. 34. of his book, had laid down this position, That notwithstanding any plea of conscience, yet if the error be destructive to the State, a man may be dealt withall by the State for it. And secondly, this, (p. 35.) That no pretence of consci∣ence can excuse a man in any matter of apparent injustice. These two conclusions pre-asserted, he comes, (p. 67.) to give this Rule for forbearance in matters of Religion: That whatsoever miscarriages in matters of Religion the Church should beare with, these the Magi∣strate should beare with: because though it should be never so much granted, that the Magistrate is Custos utriusque tabulae, yet his charge in matters of Religion reacheth not further then the charge of the Church doth. Now Mr. Edwards to confute this, in∣stanceth in a man whose conscience is not satisfied in the point of subjects taking up Armes against Armies raised by a Prince, and therefore re∣fuseth bearing Armes, and all maintenance to such a warre, &c. Such a man as this (saith he) the State may sequester, and the Parlia∣ment I think hath sequestred many upon such occasions, taking their e∣states, &c. Surely this confutation is so farre from being fit to sa∣tisfie any Scholar, that it hath hardly strength or colour enough to take women or weake people withH saith, that this & others of Mr. Bur∣roughs princi∣ples and rules about Tolera∣tion, will bee found both unsound and weak, fit to take women and weak per∣sons with, but not to satisfie any Scholar. The truth is, that many principles, the more sound & strong they are, are like to prove the lesse satisfactory to such Scholars as he. Engag'd men are usu∣sually more offended at a truth, then at an error wth opposeth them in their way.. For doth the State deale with such a person as he gives instance in, as for an error, or matter in Religion? or for injustice to the State; yea, apparent injustice, and that which is destructive to the State? For forbearing that, which if others should for beare also, the State must needs be de∣stroyed? Now evident it is, that Mr. Burroughs Doctrine or Rule touching for bearance, concerns matters of Religion, when the subject matter is Religion, not matters of State, wherein men may pretend conscience; yea, it may bee, are conscientious in∣deed so farre, and in such a sense, as men of an erroneous consci∣ence may be such. But this confutation of Mr. Burroughs is (it seems) but a for∣lorn hope; the fore-runner of a great Army of confutations ad∣vancing. Troilus (I see) will needs be trying his valour with A∣chilles, whatsoever it costs him: Infelix puer, atque impar congressus Achilli. How his Pen hath abused Mr. Ellis of Colchester, and other faith∣full servants of God in those parts, with base calumnies and
slanders, the world (I conceive) will shortly understand by an Expresse from thence: For Mr. Ellis himselfe writes thus to a friend in London. The aspersions cast on me, and some others here, by Mr. Edwards, are as false as foule: which because they are a great part of his book and strength, those who are here concerned in it, will, if God please, shortly make reply. Page 57. He affirms that the preceding letter beginning thus:Sect. 29. (p. 54.) Worthy Sir, the consideration of those many, &c. was written to him by a person religious, and cordially affected to the Parliament. I know not the man my selfe, and therefore shall not attempt to infringe this testimony of him out of any personall experience which I have of him, or of his wayes: but shall onely referre the Reader for his satisfaction, both concerning the man, and the te∣stimony given to him, to this ensuing letter, written by one well enough known to himselfe, to a speciall friend of his about the Citie. DEarly beloved and much honored in Christ, grace, mercy and peace be multiplied to you, and to as many as are enabled by the power of God to look towards Sion. As I was hastily perusing a book writ in Mr. Ed∣wards name, among sever all letters therein contained, I found one written by a person with whom I have more then ordinary acquaintance. In which letter the glory of God, the pure institutions of the Lord Jesus, with the Saints practises, are maliciously abused, as also your selfe not a little con∣cern'd. In consideration of the which, I was not a little prest in my own spi∣rit, neither indeed could I refrain, but needs must declare unto you the per∣son that wrote it (as he himself acknowledgeth,) not knowing but it might seem strange unto you, and remain as a burden upon your spirit, that the author of so many falshoods, and, as they appeare to me, palpable untruths, should be (by such a one as Mr. Edwards) termed a man religious, and cordially affected to the Parliament. But not to withhold you any longer, his name is Josiah Ricraft, the same man in whose name the Reply to your Answer was printed, the which whether he did indite, or no, I will not af∣firm, only I may thinke, but it matters not much whether he or another did indite it, only this I am confident of, hee is a man so far from▪ being reli∣gious, and cordially affected to the Parliament, (as Mr. Edwards would make the world beleeve, that I shall, and am able by evident testimonies, yea and by that knowledge I in particular have of him, perspicuously make it appeare (and had done before this, had I not been extraordinarily pre∣vented) that he is an enemy to the Parliament, State, and Kingdome, by
concealing, countenancing, & bearing correspondency with such as endevour nothing more then the overthrow of religion & the subjects liberty. At pre∣sent I shal speak no more cōcerning him, then what I my self distinctly know of him: After he had taken the solemne league & covenant, he did invio∣lation thereof, conceal a Colonell the which came out of the Kings Army, and from him did receive the Kings Picture. This Colonell not daring to goe abroad in the day time. All this he did declare in my hearing; nay, during the time this Colonell was in town, he did carry, as now hee doth, a great correspondency with one Mr. Roberts, Minister, being one in fel∣lowship with him, whose life this Colonel would have taken from him, if I be not misinformed, the which as I am credibly informed, had Mr. Ro∣berts known of the Colonels being in town, he would have endeavoured the hanging of him, & that not without cause, for former discourtesies received from him, too tedious to relate. I shal deferre the naming of him until I am called to testifie what I here declare, the which I hope wil be suddenly. And though he was wisht & desired to discover him, pressing the Covenant upon him, yet would he not: I shall at the present, as not desiring to be tedious, present you with one passage more; it is concerning one who being to goe to Oxford with an intent to take up Arms for the King, he wel knowing he was a malignant, and would not take the covenant, yet him did he furnish with mony to carry him to Oxford, and hath since taken up Armes. This I shall through the help of God make appeare to be really true, and will de∣clare his name and where he lived, the which I now forbeare in regard of some friends whom I am not willing in the least to grieve; were not the glory of God and the Kingdoms good interessed in it, I should not at present have mentioned any thing of this nature, but not knowing any way more tending to the vindicatiou of both, I take this method. Truly, should I declare unto you how contrary his carriage and conversa∣tion is to the Gospels rule, I am confident it would sadden the spirits of con∣scientious men, and cause admiration in those who professe themselves to be followers of our Lord Jesus. I do assure you, the Lord hath so carried on my soul with divine contemplation, and sweet communion & fellowship with the Father and the Son, that all the unreasonable dealings I have received from him, have not made any impression upon my spirit: only this the righ∣teous God knoweth hath been no small saddening to my spirit, to see his a∣versnesse of spirit to those who are of his own judgement. But these mis∣carriages I shall let passe untill a more convenient season, desiring with all my soule the Lord may through the glorious and rich discoveries of him∣selfe powerfully upon his spirit, cause him to be ashamed of his folly, and to
own his weaknesses, that the Lord may yet be honored by him, and his soule comforted in the day of our Lord Jesus. And now that God who hath made such rich discoveries, and glorious manifestations of his tender love to you in the Son of his love, strengthen you throughout, that you may be a∣ble to stand, and withstand all the opposition you shall meet withall from any generation of men, and that you may increase with the increasings of God. And this is the request of him who is Your brother in the Rock Christ, G. C. As to the contents of the letter written to Mr. Edw. by that reli∣giousSect. 30. person, and so cordially affected to the Parliament (as you have heard) how notoriously false are a great part of them! As first, that Mr. Kiffen, and some others, upon their disputes with Dr. Featley, M. Seaman, M. Calamy, M. Porter, and others, gave out to their mem∣bers that they had the better, and that M. Calamy durst not dispute with them. Both which are disavowed by the persons charged, and with certainty of knowledge that the reporter can never prove either the one or the other of them. 2. The said letter affirmeth, that M. Kiffen was left out from that disputation which was held and to be held with M. Calamy▪ &c. whereas it is so far from the truth, that he was left out from this disputation, that earnestly soliciting an exemption from that ingagement, his motion herein was absolutely refused by the rest that were to dispute. 3. He affirmeth, that the said M. Kiffen was put to do the drudgery, to fetch up members scattered to and fro in the countrey &c. This also is as false as falshood it selfe can make a report to be: The said M. Kiffen never stir'd a foot out of the Citie, further then his own house all the while. 4. This religious person in the same letter saith, that not onely M Kiffen, but others also of them did the like good service (as Hobson the Taylor) in their places. This again is so far from truth, or likeli∣hood of truth, that this Hobson he speaks of, with Mr. Kiffen, were (amongst others) made choyce of by their friends to attend the disputation, and to manage their interest in the controversie a∣gainst their opposers, and therefore could not doe that, besides which there was nothing possible to be done by them, or any o∣thers, that can now save the pen of Religious I. R. from the pollu∣tion and reproach of a false pen. 5. The said letter advanceth yet further in her way of folly, and
affirmeth, that one of their members, whose name is Palmer, being reco∣vered, came into their Conventicle house, and there before many people said, That Physitians left her as they found her. This is a very empha∣ticall untruth; the woman never making use of any Physitian all the time of her sicknesse. 6. This letter (which seems to be Gangrena's chiefe favourite a∣mong all her fellowes) being loath that any other should carry away the whetstone from her, pleads for this prize with such an argument, which makes all the quaint inventions, and bold ficti∣ons, and daring relations in the book besides, to give place and yeeld the crown. This is a story of a woman that was to be rebap∣tized; a story which makes the tale of Gargantua and Don Quixote with his windmils, to look like Gospels in comparison of it. It is pitie the relator should either eat or drink, till either he hath pro∣ved the truth, or else confessed the untruth of it. This letter boasts what mischiefe it could doe yet further, as when it saith, Many such Heathenish & Atheisticall passages WITH BASENES, I could relate of this man & some of his members, &c. It is very likely that what ever you can do in this kind, you must doe it WITH BASENES, or else let it alone. But indeed you have givē the world a very full account of your great ability to relate what heathenish and Atheisticall passages you please of any man. Hee that can report and avouch the last mentioned story for a truth, may be confident that his forehead will not fail him in any adventure of impudence whatsoever. For a conclusion, I shal only point you to some few more spotsSect. 31. which appeare here and there in the body of the Gangrene, which plainly shew the very vitals & inward parts of it to be pestilenti∣ally infected; & I make no question but ere long you will see the whole body of it full of such spots all over, which will plainly be∣wray the constitution of it to be the poyson of Dragons, and gall of Asps. Pag. 93. he affirms, That severall Sectaries went early to Bristoll (he means since the retaking of it by the Parliament,) and into Wales also; instancing in two, with an &c. viz. one M. Bacon, and M. Symonds: This M. Symonds professeth, that since the reco∣very of Bristoll, he came not neer either Bristoll or Wales by fourty miles. But if M. Edw. comes within fourty miles of the Truth, he makes a commendable voyage. I beleeve hee came not neer it by twice fourty, when p. 100. speaking of great livings, hee calleth
them, a thing which their Presbyterian souls abhorre. The tenor of the passage is this: He chargeth M. Peters, frequently to have prea∣ched in Citie and countrey, that were it not for livings of two or three hundred pounds a yeare, there would be no difference between the Presby∣terians and the Independents. And glossing this text, addeth, wicked∣ly and maliciously insinuating unto the people, as if Presbyterian Mini∣sters opposed the way of Independency because of great livings, A THING OƲR SOƲLS ABHOR. If his meaning be, that the practice here gently insinuated against them▪ viz. that the opposing the way of Independency because of great livings, is a thing which their soul abhors, not the great livings themselves, I say no more but this; I wish the rule were as true as the exception: i. that the opposing the way of Independency for great livings, were as truly the abhorring of Presbyterian souls, as the great livings themselves are NOT. Pag. 70. he affirms, That one of Lilborns eyes was PƲT OƲT bySect. 32. a Pike in the street, immediatly upon his letter comming forth against Mr. Prynne and the Assembly. By the way it seems he hath forfeited his honour of being Lieutenant-Colonel, by the high crime of wri∣ting a letter against M. Prynne and the Assembly; yea and all his inte∣rest in the honor and gentry of his House and Family. But had not M. Edw. a great beam in his own eye, he might easily have seen, that neither of Lilborns eyes are put out. He is able to see and read twenty untruths and ten in M. Edw. book, with the worst of them. That which he reports of him, p. 96. that hee is reported to bee one, who is a player at cards, either is a false report it self, or at least a Re∣port of a Report which is false, and so little better. The man prote∣sted that he never plaid a game at cards since his coming to London. The rest of the aspersives in the same retinue, as that he is reported to be a man of a loose life, prophaning the Lords day in sports, one who will sit long with company at wine and tipling, &c. are grapes grow∣ing upon the same thorn. In the page last named, he talks of one Thomas Moore of Lincolnshire, a great Sectary and manifestarian: I be∣leeve M. Edw. himself is the greatest manifestarian under heaven. There is no man hath manifested that weaknes of judgement, that strength of malice against the Saints, which he hath done. And for Thomas Moore of Lincolnshire, a Sectary of that magnitude which hee imports, I no more beleeve there is any such man, then I doe that there is any such woman at Brasteed in Kent, as he speaks of, p. 88. 89. that is a Preacher, and that with others breaks bread in her order.
Mr. Saltmarsh in his late booke affirms, that the contrary is knowne to himselfe and all the Towne. Pag. 128. He talks of Bishop Hall, or one of his Chaplains, as holdingSect. 33. far smaller errors then I (he means chiefly, in the point of Justification, as appears by the context.) But that I hold any errors in Justificati∣on, greater then himself, yea or any so great by many degrees, who yet (I make no question) presumes himself as Orthodox in the point as either the Bishop he speaks of, or any of his Chaplains, will be a thousand times said, before once prov'd, either by himself, or all his party of godly Orthodox Presbyteriall Ministers. Pag. 8. of his Dedi∣catory Epistle, his forehead serves him to abuse the honorable Hou∣ses of Parliament with this loud untruth, that there are eleven meet∣ings, at least, of Sectaries, in one Parish in this Citie. What shall be given unto thee▪ or what shall be done unto thee, thou false tongue? Sharp ar∣rowes of the mighty, and coales of Juniper Psal 120. 3, 4. Setting aside the Presbyte∣rian meetings, confident I am, that he cannot find the one halfe of that number he speaks of, of meetings of all other Sectaries, in any Parish whatsoever in the Citie. But this saying of his needs not be melancholy for want of com∣pany; it hath Brethren enough in the iniquitie of it. And because the pages of his book are not large enough to contain the shameless un∣truths he hath a minde to utter, he quarters them here and there in the margent of it. You shall find two together in the margent of the second and third pages of his Preface. Here first he saith, that Over∣ton an Independent Book-seller boasted that an Answer (to his Antapolo∣gie) was in the Presse. Whereas he onely said (and that without boast∣ing) that there was an Answer to it entred in their Hall-Booke, and ready for the Presse. 2. He addes iniquitie to iniquitie; and saith, that Eaton an Independent, Milliner, said the same words, who yet spake not so much; for he neither said that it was in the Presse, nor yet that it was entred into the Hall book. And who should report, that some of John Goodwins Church reported, that some of his Church∣members preached for him, because he was answering the Antapologie; I believe he no more knoweth, then declareth. And why he calls Ea∣ton an Independent Milliner, I believe, if he were called to an account, he could give none; but like unto himselfe, i. either some vagrant and loose report that he was so; or some poore reason, 89 degrees of Lo∣gique latitude from a sufficient proofe or demonstration. But the saying is, Tractant fabrilia fabri.
Pag. 33. speaking of Mr Burroughs opinion formerly mentioned,Sect. 34. which he makes the 150 error in his Catalogue, he brands it with this false mark in his margin: This is an error destructive to the power of Civill Magistrates, and safety of Common-wealths, in divers cases. The truth is, that the opinion, 1. is no error, but a Truth: and 2. so farre from being an error destructive, either to the power of Civill Magi∣strates, or safety of Common-wealths, in any case or cases whatsoever; that it is a Truth of a soveraigne importance, both for the support and strengthning of the Magistrates power; as also for the safety of Common-wealths. The smoak of the exception made against it, was before scattered. And if he were examined how he came by that sto∣ry, p. 104. concerning Mr Kiffen (formerly spoken of) viz. that he should tell the Church, that he would relate the whole matter (concerning the womans recovery that had been anointed) I feare he could hard∣ly prove, that he came honestly by it. The man assures me, that there was no such undertaking, nor relation made by him at all. Reader, I have (for the present) given thee onely a taste of MrSect. 35. Edwards grapes: yet sufficient (I presume) to convince thee, that his vine, is of the vine of Sodom, and of the fields of Gomorrah; his grapes, grapes of gall; his clusters bitter; his wine, the poyson of dragons, and the cruell venome of Aspes Deut. 32. 32, 33.. I professe truly, that I have not read one quarter of the book, as yet; nor know whether I shall ever care to read it thorough or no. The far greatest part of the particulars de∣tected, were observ'd by others, and presented unto me. A few daies (I make no question) will give thee more light, wherewith to com∣prehend his darknesse. By that time the boughs of his tree are a little more withered, they will be broken off: the women will come, and set them on fire Isa. 27. 11.. The day will come, and is even at the dore, when there will be scarce one stone left upon another of all this false building, which will not be pull'd downe by the hand of Truth. And when the ser∣vants of God shall have had the opportunitie to wash off that dirt and filth which Mr. Edwards hath now cast upon them, Gangraena will be found a strumpet, yea and of the race & lineage of that Great scarlet whore, which corrupteth the Earth with her fornication Revel. 19. 2.. The Cretians are alwaies lyers, evill beasts▪ slow bullies. This testimony is true: wherefore rebuke them sharply, that they may be sound in the faith Tit. 1. 12, 13.. I trust that this brief Answer, will contribute a proportionable in∣fluence toward this blessed effect upon Mr Edwards, and helpe to make him more sound both in Faith, and manners also. FINIS.
