J651 e791_2 99866382 118654
A SERMON Preached at MARY ALDERMANBURY, ON The 5. Day of NOVEMBER, 1651. Being a Day set apart in remembrance of that Great Deliverance from the Gunpowder Treason. By WILLIAM JENKINS, sometimes Minister of Christ-Church London, and late Prisoner in the Tower. Being the first Sermon he Preached since his Releasement. Phil. 2.21. For me to live is Christ, and to dye is gain. 1 Cor. 6.20. For yee are bought with a price: therefore glorifie God in your body, and in your spirit, which are Gods. S. Chris. Homil. 5. in Ep. ad Rom. In having nothing, I have all things, because I have Christ; having there∣fore all things in him, I seek no other Reward, for he is the Ʋniversal Reward. Published by speciall Authority. London, Printed by R. Wood, for G. Horton, 1651.
A Sermon preached by Mr. JENKINS at Mary Aldermanbury: being the first Sermon he preached since his Releasement from the Tower of London. DEUT. 32. VERS. 10. Later part of the Verse. He found him in a desart Land; and in the waste howling Wilderness; he led him about, he instructed him, he kept him as the apple of his eye. MOses that man of God, being about to leave the World, bestows his Le∣gacies on his friends that were about him; and it is a blessed thing indeed, when we come to die, to have that liberty of Heart and Spirit, that we may be benefactors to others, and not to have Oyl onely for our own Lamps, but to have some also for our friends. The Song that Moses here made was for to ingage the people of God more strongly and firmly unto God; for those men that are unprofitable persons they dye whilest they live; but the children of God that live to God, live when they dye; nay they live after Death. There are in this Text three things considerable. First, The great proness and readiness of the people of God, to apostatize from him on all occasions; as you may see at large in the six first verses of this Chapter. Secondly, By way of ingageing them to stedfastness to God: he not onely tells them of the proness of their hearts to fall away from God, but shews them also the goodness of God in keeping and preserving them from apostatizing from him in the next nine verses, Deut. 32.7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. Thirdly, He also layes down the Denunciation of the Judgments of God against those that do apostatize from him, in the following part of the Chapter. I shall speak of the second thing, and that is the goodness of God to his Israel, which he sets out several wayes, but more especially in the Text, which is two wayes. First, His directing . Secondly, His protecting Goodness to his people. 1 His directing Goodness, he hedgeth them about, he keepeth them, and instructeth them, saith the spirit of God, 'tis most properly understood, Gods hedging them about in all their journeys, and occasi∣ons, he is a Cloud by Day, and a Pillar of Fire by night to guide them, he is their God and Guide. 2 God instructed them, and that two wayes. First, he taught them to see the wickedness of their own hearts, by the goodness of his wayes; he watred them and gave them water out of the Rook, and gave them bread from Heaven. Secondly, He instructed them in the Laws of God in the Wilderness, as it is said, There was none like Jacob who had all the Statutes of God. Thirdly, The Spirit of God doth not set out his goodness to his people by directing them onely, but by protecting them also; as in the later part of the Text which I shall principally insist on at this time.
First, for explication, out of which, I shall draw some proper inferences for your own benefit. 1 He kept them as the apple of his eye: Here you may see the great love and goodness of God in preserving his people, as you may see in that devouring Wilder∣ness which the Israelites were in, where the red Sea was before them, and Pharoah with an Army behind them, and so many furious Beasts in the Wilderness round about them, ready to devour them; yet their God preserved them, and kept them as tender as the Apple of his eye. Now for application, there are three things. First, Why the Church of God may be compared to the Apple of his eye. Secondly, Why doth the care of God extend it self to Israel, as the care of the Ap∣ple of the eye. 3 God will express his care to Israel, as men do express care to the Apple of their eye. First, The Church of God may be compared to the Apple of the eye. First, Because of its meanness and small esteem it hath in the World; so the Apple of the eye is the smallest part, and of as little esteem as any part of the whole body: What? the Apple of the eye? that's a very mean part indeed; and the Apple of the eye by reason of its smallness, is called in the Hebrew, the little man in the eye. Secondly, The Church of God is final in its own account, it accounts of it self but lowly, for there is no high self-advancing soule enters into the Kingdom of God. 1. Tis small and low in the account of wicked men, nay of the godly men them∣selves, tis small also in comparison of the few that go to Heaven, and the number that run headlong to Hell, there goes but here one and there one, but one of a Family, and two of a Tribe, but there are many that run into the Gulf of everlasting perdition. 2. Tis mean in regard of its blackness; for it is continually in mourning, and it is black and black all over with natural corruption, and black with original impuri∣ty, and black with actual Rebellion against God, and black with the adversity of its condition here, as well as in regard of its disposition, by reason of persecution: this is the perpetual habit and condition of the Church of God, as long as it is on this side Christ; it is called Nigerrimus occulus sicculus, as long as she is without her Saviour, she is defiled with much corruption, and will never lay off her mourning apparel, till she arrives at the beauty of Eternity. Thirdly, the apple of the eye, tis mean by reason of the hiding of it felf, tis not al∣wayes seen: so the Church of God is not alwayes visible by reason of its external condition or prosperity, as the goodness of God to his enemies is no token of their being a true Church, so neither are the corrections of God to his people any token of Gods anger against his Church. And the people of God are resembled to the Apple of the eye. 1. In regard of their not appearing in themselves to others, their life is hid in God, but when he who is their life shall appear, then shall they also appear with him in glory, they are separated from the world, as the grane is separated from the chaffe. Secondly, there is a resemblance, between the Apple of the eye, and the Church, in regard of the receptivity of light for the whole Body, the light of the body is the eye, it directs the whole man, it keeps him from stumbling and falling, and by that he sees to do the work which he hath; The Church of God is the Lanthorn and Candle of Gods Ordinances, its the pillar of truth, as it is there called, because it holds forth a pillar whereon God is pleased to hang on the Proclamation of his truth, in which he sheweth his word unto Jacob, his Statutes and his Judgements to Israel: All the world be∣side sits in darkness, and therefore may well be filled with violence.
Thirdly, in regard of its tendernesse and weaknesse: what more tender then the Apple of the eye? do but touch it, and it hurts it; yet you see such things as are most tender are most fruitfull; sheep are very weak, let but one Wolf in amongst them, and he will devour many, yet they are very fruitfull; so worms are very weak and contemptible Creatures, though there be thousands of them killed, yet still there are abundance: though they are contemptible and weak, yet they are increasing creatures. So the people of God, though they are weak and undervalued, yet they are an increasing people, and shall not be destroyed, because all their strength is in another. Fourthly, There is a resemblance between the Apple of the eye, and the People of God, in regard of the dearnesse and care a man hath of the Apple of his eye; there is no part of the body so dear to a man as that; he had rather lose any limb of the body then sustain one prick with a pin in the eye. And indeed so are the Churches of God dear and precious in the sight of Christ, he hath a great care over them further saith he, Of all those thou hast given me, I have not lost one. The People of God are very dear to him. Sampson when he lost his eyes, it made him desire God that he might be avenged of the Philistines; And Sampson called unto the Lord and said, O Lord God remember me I pray thee, and strengthen me only this once, O God, that I may be once avenged of the Philistines for my two eys. God will not suffer his people to be wronged. 2 Wherein is Gods care to his Church, exprest as men expresse care to the Apple of their eyes, in these following Considerations. First, His Cura protectionis, his care of protecting them, is manifested to his Church and People, as the care of mans protection to the Apple of his eye; He watcheth and keepeth Israel which neither slumbers nor sleepeth. There is a two fold Gift that God bestoweth on the eye, which likewise may be said he bestoweth on his Church. First, Inward protection. Secondly, Outward protection and more Formal. First, Inward protection God bestows on the eye, which are of divers sorts, and do much preserve the eye. So God bestows inward protection, which is strength of heart to bear their afflictions; I can do all things through Christ that strengthens me, saith the Apostle: and again Strengthened with all might according to his glorious power unto all patience and long suffering with joyfulness; this is inward protection when being weak we are made strong. Secondly, God gives the eye Outward protection, which may be also said to be given to his people, and that in several respects. First, In regard of the Eye lid, and the hairs of it, which defends it, and keeps it from danger. Secondly, Eye brow: so also there's a kind of Trench to take in the water, that it may not offend it. Thirdly, The Armes to be lifted up to defend it, and to apply a remedy to it. So first, Sometimes God is as the eye lid to the eye, he warns his people of dangers to come, that so they touch not his Church or people. Secondly, When dangers do fall on his Church he protects them so, that they do not break them in pieces, it may be they bruise them a little, as the eye brow is black and blew, but it touches not the Ap∣ple of the eye. Thirdly, Sometimes God gives his people Hands and Arms to defend them against the enemies of his Church. Secondly, In regard of his care of protecting his people, and compassion to them, he is as tender of them as a mother is of her sucking child. Can a woman forget her sucking child, that she should not have compassion on the son of her womb; yea she may forget, yet will I not for∣get thee, saith the Lord: and again, In all their afflictions he was afflicted, and the Angel of his presence saved them in his love and in his pity, he redeemed them, and he bare them, and he carried them all the days of old. It is between God and his Church as between two Lute. strings that are tuned one to another, no sooner one is struck but the other trembles: Such a Sympathy there is between Christ and his people, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me, saith our Saviour? and the children of God will be so when their brethen are persecuted and affli∣.
Thirdly, In regard of a Senative and healing care God hath of people, whereby he labours to heal the wounds of his people: Come let us return unto the Lord, for he hath torn, and he will heal, he hath smitten, and he wil bind us up. If there lie any wounds in thy body, or in thy estate, or in thy name, or in thy spirit, God wil pour Oyl into thy wounds, and will heal and re∣cover thee. 4 There is a vindicating care in God to his people; he will wound those that wound his Church: As in the old Law, there was taken an eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth; so now, God will have a retalliation of punishment. And although he forbear long, yet he will avenge himself on the enemies of his Church; and the longer he stays, the more use he requires, For he that toucheth you, toucheth the Apple of his eye: as if he should have said, he that touch∣eth my people, had as good put out his own eye, he doth but make a halter for his own neck, he doth not onely that which is a vain thing, but he shoots up arrows against heaven, and they fall down upon his own head. Thirdly, Why GOD expresseth such great care to his people, as men express care to the Apple of their eye, here is three things to be considered, First, Consider what the Apple of the eye is in it self. Secondly, Consider what other things are to the Apple of the eye. Thirdly, Consider, what the Apple of the eye is to God. 1 What is it in it self, it is an exceeding weak and low thing, not able to endure a blow, 'tis very tender. So the people of God are in themselves very weak and low, and when none are able to do good for them, then God arises and appears to help them: When God sees the Oppression of the poor and needy, then will he arise, and set them at liberty, saith the Psalmist; and in another place, Who remembrest us in our low estate for thy Mercy endureth for e∣ver. As it is with a Ball, the higher it ariseth, the harder it is stricken; so the higher the Enemies of God act against his People and Church, the harder will their punishment be: God will defend them. Secondly, What other things are to the Apple of the eye, they are annoyance to it, let but the least sand that is get into the eye, and it troubles and hurts it, or never so small a peble stone touch the eye, and it offends it; nay, the very wind offends it if it blows but into it, and the Sun it self is a great annoyance to it. So the Devil, that great enemy of Gods Church, is continu∣ally seeking wayes and means to offend Gods people, so that the Church of God is another Mesopotamia. Again, they are very hurtfull to the people of God, their hate is implacable against them: Ar∣rians agree with Heathens, and Sectaries agree better with Heathens then with the people of God, because their ends are destructive to them; yet for all this God he keeps them as tender as the Apple of his eye; I have interest in thee, saith God. Psal. 119. v. 94. thou art mine, and I am thine; we are his by Election, he hath elected us to all eternity; we are his by donation also, God hath given us to him; we are his too by purchase, he hath laid down the price of the rich∣est Pearl, Iohn 7.6. he hath laid down his dearest Bloud for his people, he hath bought them with a price; and we are his likewise by stipulation, he hath entred into Covenant for to pro∣tect and defend us, Ezek. 16.6. and protection (you know) draws Legions after one. Lastly, we are his in regard of habitation, and also in point of participation, you know a man regards his own, and cares not for anothers; so if a woman see another womans child crying, or tumbling in the dirt, why (saith she) that is none of my child, mine is in mine arms, she doth not at all regard it: So say some, 'tis very strange that God should in the Scripture, Gen. 31. set down the story of Iacob, a poor countrey-man, that he had a few ewes and lambs, ring-streak∣ed and spotted, and to take no notice of the actions of the great Emperours of the world, this seems very strange to some, but this shews the great love and estimation he bears to his own people. Thus much shall serve for explication. Secondly, For Information.
First, to take notice of the great malice of the enemies of God, and adversaries of Chist, that they will be content with nothing but the Apple of Gods eye, which is his people, and by how much the more they bear the image of their Father in their faces, so much the more vehemently do wicked men hate them, as it is with a Traytor, that is escaped out of the Countrey where he committed the Treason; yet if they can but get his picture they burn it, so the enemies of Christ, rend and tear his Church and People, or any that are like them. Secondly, Herein you may see the great Patience of God in induring and suffering to have his tender eye plucked at, but indeed though it be strange to us, yet he manifesteth himself to to be as great a God in sparing the enemies of his Church as in punishing them, for none but God could keep their hands from them. But he is God and not Man, therefore shall the seed of the Serpent be destroyed: we think it tedious to let our enemies ride on our backs a few years, but consider the year of recompence is to come, his forbearance is no part of payment, God he is the greatest Martyr in the world, he suffers continually in regard of the similitude which is between him and his Members, should he but give one slip of hand, they would fall into hell yet he upholds them, he causeth the Sun to shine on the just and on the unjust, he let∣teth the rain water their habitations. Yet this is no argument of his love to them, therefore let us submit our selves to the good will and pleasure of God. Thirdly, Another reason why God suffers his Church and people to be so weak is; because his care may be the more seen in protecting them, and delivering them, that it may be seen to be done by the power of God and not of Man. Fourthly, God is wonderfully provoked by his people, when he suffereth his eye to be pulled out by wicked men. Consider therefore if thy eye, hath not been a wanton and a proud eye, if it had not God would never have done so. If one drop of Gall could possibly make a stream of honey bitter and loathsome: So one sin is enough to make God very angry with his people. Oh! 'tis a very vile thing of his people to sin against him; he will chastise them with the Sword and Rod of Man. Fifthly, Hereby you may see the great misery of those that have no shelter to help them: men that have no interest in God, he casts them off from his care; he hath as great a care of the Devils, he casts them off by six and sevens: But God bestowes a gra∣cious preservation to his people, he keepeth them to his everlasting Kingdom. Having promise of the life that now is, and that which is to come, 1 Tim. 4.8. The wicked they are pre∣served too: but how? as men are kept in prison till the day of execution come. Think of this I beseech you that have no interest in God, that he taketh no care of you: A woman when she sees anothers child crying, takes no care as long as she sees her own quiet in her arms. And so a man is not much taken with the hearing of a fire that hap∣peneth some 20 miles off, so long as his own house is free, he regardeth not another mans. So its with God, They are none of my people (saith he) let them go on: Gods Mercies to the Wicked are avenging Mercies: Thus much shall serve for Information. Secondly, Now for Exhortation, severall lessons: First, by way of Duty: If the people of God be as dear to him as the apple of his eye, then let God be as dear to you as the apple of your eye, God in his Ordinances, God in his Ministers, God in his Servants, God in his glory. Say, Lord he that toucheth these toucheth the apple of thine eye; not because they are mine enemies Lord, but because they are thy enemies: Lord if thy honour be any wayes impaired, then the apple of mine eye is pricked: doth any of you do this? Do any of you lay the sufferings of Christ to heart? You should mourn and weep at these things as if the apple of your eye were hurt: when you see God suffer by Heresies, Blasphemies, and Prophanesse, you should lay your sins also to heart, and say; Lord, when I arise up in the morning I sin
against thee, and when I lie down I offend thee; every corruption should be as a Thorn in your Foot, or as a Thorn in your Eye, this is a gracious temper of a truly humble heart; 'twill say, Lord who will deliver me from this Body of sin. Secondly, By way of Exhortation, please not your selves in your bodily protection; do not onely give God the Casket of your body, but give him thy soul, fling it into the Arms of Christ, and commit thy soul to him as to thy faithfull Creator: Say as our Saviour did: 'Tis a great honour for a man to be Protector to a Kings son; but who will regard the Protectorship of a Beggars son: give thy soul into the hands of God, he is willing to re∣ceive it, and say, Lord, keep my soul, that my soul may not offend thee in sinning. Thirdly, labour to bring others under the keeping of God, if he be such an excellent Keeper; say to him: Lord keep thou my husband, keep thou my wife; Lord, keep thou my child, keep thou my Father, keep thou my Mother: You know it is a very sad complaint of many in the world, that they have not money where with all to keep them; but it is a far sad∣der complaint not to have a God to keep them: that is very sad indeed. Fourthly, If God doth promise to keep thee, do not leave intreating him; let it be thy daily prayer to Christ Jesus to keep thee daily. The prodigall son was never better then when he lived with his Father; 'twas better he thought to be one of his Fathers servants, then to leave him; the Saints and servants of God: their work-day is better then the sinners Holy-day. Fifthly, for some good Directions. Let it be the chief study of the people of God to be brought under this care of God, that he may be their Keeper. First, be sure you be Gods, every man loves that which is his own, so doth God love his own people. And they shall be mine, saith the Lord of Hosts, in that day that I make up my fewels; and I will spare them, as a man spareth his own son that serveth him. We must not be Gods onely in a visible profession, but in a reall Implantation: I know in visible profession every one will be Gods; but that is not enough to be his in regard of outward compliance onely, but you must be his by inward alliance, to kill sin, as well as to save your soul. If a man have a wooden leg or a glass eye he values not a blow on his leg, or a prick in his eye: So a man must not be visibly Christs only, but must change his nature, and be at union with him, and he must take Christ for his Saviour and Lord, he must be Christs own if he expect mer∣cy by him. Secondly, Be sure that you be weak in your own esteem, the apple of the eye is weak, therefore ther's the eye-lid to defend it from harm: self-diffidence is self-downfall; it is the humble Christian that lies down in his own apprehension that stands before God longest. Thirdly, Be wary of all places and occasions that may hurt you, for when you go into the way of temptation and sin, you do put your self out of Gods protection, tis neither Gods way nor thy way. Fourthly, Labour to rest quietly in thy protection, confide there: They trusted in the Lord, therefore he defended them, the people of God must depend on him in troublesome times, and then they will never be in trouble, they must commit their souls to God, as into the hands of a faithful Keeper; and then the greatest hurt their enemies can do to them will prove their greatest good, though they may take away your head, yet they cannot take away your heart. Last of all, rest on God. And there rest until his wrath be over. I coulst here make a Sermon only of the deliverances God hath vouchsafed us of this Kingdom. And I could shew you how we were once as the Apple of Gods Eye, in weakness and black∣ness, and in having dangerous Enemies, and they many and hurtful; and how God hath been pleased to bestowe on us his protecting care, his compassionate care, his
vindicating care: For all which let us give God the glory of our praises, praise him with your tongue, praise him with your hearts, praise him with your lips. God saith, the Lyons shall die for hunger, but Gods people shall not want: therefore let us not neglect the mercies of God, and regard every light affliction; let us rejoyce in the sight of God, and blesse and praise his name for all his mercies, it is not with the Devills good will that we have another fifth of November; for as heretofore he laboured to de∣stroy us by the Papists, so now he doth his endeavour to do it by Heresies, and filthy blasphemies against the name of God, but the praises of his people are the tributes which God expects: I say, again let us praise God with our Tongues, Hands and Hearts, Let the praises of God be seen in our conversing on what God hath done for us. An Apologie to the Reader. Christian Reader, ENtring into a serious consideration of publishing this Sermon, and considering with my self, the great benefit that may redound to the Church and people of God by it, and supposing that the Authour thereof would not publish it, I have adventured to make it publick; for by this means, that which was delivered then only to a few, by the publishing of it, Multitudes may be built up to a higher degree, of stedfastness and resolution in God, who hath such a tender fatherly care over his people, and indeed it is very useful for these back-sliding times wherein we live, where it is so common a thing, for men to fall off from Gods care and protection, and to rest wholly in the strength of men. And although God doth hold forth himself so comfortably in his holy word, unto his people, that he will be their God and guide, to direct and protect them in all their wayes, and doth promise them, (as is shewn in this portion of Scripture, which is here handled) to be their instructer and protector, and will keep them as tender as the apple of his eye: yet to u shame be it spoken, we are so apt to apostatize from God, that we set light by his Fatherly tenders and proffers unto us. And indeed one of the chiefest ends and purposes in making this Sermon publick was, that both thou and I, and all the people of God, may so read and make use of this Sermon, that we may see plainly, that too too common errour of most men, in falling off from the protection of God, who is so loving to us, and that we may learn to rest with confidence (in him, and in him only) of his pro∣tection in all our adversities, and I hope that many of the Generation of those that seek Gods face, and favour here on earth shall find this Sermon, if rightly used, some help to keep them stedfast to God; you know that many and wonderful have the mercies of God been in preserving his Church and people, as he hath done by preserving us from that hellish Powder-plot, besides many other mercies and deliverances he hath bestowed on us, at sundry other times. O then let us not forget these his deliverances bestowed on us, let them not be bestowed in vain, but labour to requite these his loving kindnesses, and labour to abound more and more in every work towards God. In this short Sermon you may find many comforts, if you live in dangerous places, or perseeuting times, here is great comfort for you, God still keeps you as the Apple of his eye: here you may see the danger thou runnest into by apostatizing from God. To be short, this Sermon affords variety of comfort, you may see also the protecting, directing, compassing, and preserving care God hath of his people, whereby you may be incouraged to a more chearfull dependance on him. Reader, let me desire thee to read it over, and meditate seriously on what thou readest, and thou maist reap benefit by it, fru∣strate not the Authours intent, who when he preached it intended the benefit of his Hearers, and give God the glory of all; And whereas divers had a desire to peruse it, but complained it was too dear, for their sakes I have published this sheet; desiring thee to passe by the errours in it, and at∣tribute them to the Printers, and to me, and not any way to the reverend Authour; and in so doing, you shall obliege him unto you on the like occasion, who esteemeth himself to be a Servant, to the Servants of God, in Christ Jesus, G. H. FINIS.
