P4117 E514_2 99864966 164356
Twelve QVERIES OF Publick Concernment Humbly submitted to the serious consi∣deration of the Great Councell of the Kingdome. By a Cordiall Well-wisher to its Proceedings. 1. WHether it be not a Work of extraordinary Necessity and Benefit to the whole Kingdom, to abolish and reform all unnecessary Delayes by Protections, Essoynes, fri∣vilous Pleas, Demurrers, general Writs of Error, Mo∣tions in arrest of Judgment after Verdicts upon full E∣vidence, Injunctions in Chancery, and the like, in suits and proceedings at the Common Law; and to take a∣way all arrests and reversals of Judgments after verdict for any defect of form, or meer misprisions or neglects of Clerks, Attorneys, Councel, and the like, which the Client could not prevent? Whether it be not re∣quisite to take away the allowance of Clergy in all cases of Felony, since Bi∣shops are abolished? it being a meer Relique of Popery, allowed only to Men, not Women, though guilty of the same offence; and a badge of great injustice, to condemn and execute one Felon, only because he cannot read, and save another guilty of the same offence at the self-same time, only because he can read his Neck-verse, or the Ordinary (against truth and con∣science) affirm to the Judge, Legit vt Clericus: whereas in reason, he that can read, deserves rather of the two to dye, because he is more learned, and so more capable of instruction, then he that cannot read at all. And whether it be not just, equitable, and beneficial to the Republick to make intailed Lands liable to just Debts, Statutes, and Judgments, as well as Fee-simple or Chattle Leases? And to bring Gentlemen and others that are no Merchants or Tradesmen, who lie in prison or obscure themselves refusing to pay or compound their just debts, within all the Statutes of Bankrupts, as well as those who live by buying and selling?
2. Whether the speedy regulation and settlement of the jurisdiction of all Courts of Justice Civill and Ecclesiasticall, and of the exorbitant Fees of all Clerks and Officers in them, and in both houses and all Committees of Parlia∣ment; and the Rectifying of all Extortions and Abuses in Common Goales and Prisons, much complained of, be not a thing of such present publike Ne∣cessity and Utility, as admits no longer delay, and deserves the Parliaments spee∣dy consideration? And whether it wil not be an excellent ready means to reform abuses of Common Goals and Prisons, to make them all Houses of Correction and Common-Work-Houses, where all Felons and Criminall persons of ordi∣nary quality shall be enforced to work for their living during their imprison∣ment, and receive due correction in case of refusall, to keep them from idleness and other Vices; and to provide Preachers to instruct them there? 3. Whether a new Coronation Oath, with some effectual clauses to secure the subjects Liberties against the Invasions of pretended Royall Prerogatives, be not simply necessary for our future security; the old Oath having been altered in some materiall things? And whether an Oath enjoyned by the Houses to all their members, in all publike and private causes that come before them in the House or at Committees, to proceed and Vote according to the merits and justice of the cause, and the best advantage of the Commonwealth, to the best of their skill and judgement, without any fear, favour, hatred, affection or partiality; would not give much satisfaction to the people, and prevent all scandals and jealosies of partiality and affection under which some Members and Committees may else sometimes chance to suffer? 4. Whether it would not be an Act of noble Justice and Equity, for the Par∣liament to take some speedy course to satisfie the just Debts of such wel-affe∣cted Persons, (who are now fallen into great necessity, and ready to perish for want) freely lent long since upon the publike faith, before they satisfie arrears or pay Debts to any Members or Officers, who are in no such present Ne∣cessity, and have gained much by the Wars; since many of the richer sort are to be satisfied their publike faith, out of the Excise and sale of Bishops Lands? 5. Whether the speedy suppression of al standing Country Committees & their Troops (against whom there are many grievous complaints) erected onely in case of necessity, be not absolutely needfull, both for the peoples ease and contentment, the expediting of the Accounts of the Kingdome, the reducing all things to the Ancient course of Justice, the preservation of the remaining Breeds of Cattle, sheep, horses, and Stocks of the Kingdome, almost destroyed by them and their Agents, the true cause of their present dearth? And whether it be not worth the inquiry, who and what are the reall causes they are still supported, continued, after so many complaints, motions, Votes, and Ordinances drawn in both Houses to abolish them? 6. Whether it be not worthy the Parliaments present Examination, how many Companies of Horse & Foot designed for Ireland, have for many moneths taken free Quarter on the Country, contrary to Ordinances, without any Order as yet for their transportation; and who have been the causes of this great abuse, that
they may be exemplarily punished? Whether many Irish Rebels and Cavaleers under a pretext of going for Ireland, have not listed and kept themselves in Companies, taken free Quarter, levyed Taxes, and committed many un∣sufferable Robberies, out-rages in divers Counties, to the great scandall of the Parliament, the intollerable oppression and discontenting of the people, with∣out any Orders but their own? And whether such (if not speedily disbanded and exemplarily censured) may not raise up new commotions in the King∣dome, by joyning with the Malignant partie, and other disbanded male-con∣tents; or else mutiny the people against the Parliament by their Exorbitances? 7. Whether it be good husbandry or policy to imploy such Commissaries or Agents in the affaires of Ireland now, who have defrauded the Parliament in that imployment heretofore? Or to send provisions into Ireland from London, Norfolk, Suffolk, Sussex, the East & Southern parts, through the narrow Seas▪ (where Pyrats oft times meet with them) at three times the charge of fraight, ten times the hazzard, losse, length of time and inconvenience (such provisi∣ons being for the most part spoyled, or much impaired with long lying at Sea, and seldome ariving in due season) as they might be transported from the Western Ports; and in the mean time to eate out and waste all the Provisions of the Western Counties nearest to Ireland with free quarter of Horse and Foot, pretended for Ireland, but yet not shipped thither in eight or nine moneths space; from whence Ireland and the forces there should and might re∣ceive seasonable supplys with far more speed, safety, convenience, and at much easier rates then now they do? And whether it be not worth the Inquiry, what is the true cause of such miscariages? 8. Whether it be not of absolute necessity both for the Parliaments, King∣domes, Countries safety, to put the Orthodox conformable wellaffected party in each County (as the Militia of it) into aspeedy posture of Defence, under faithful Commanders of their own chusing, first approved by the Houses; both to suppresse the present and future insolencies, mutinies of such disorderly Souldiers & Cavaliers, who straggle up and down refusing to disband, the over∣awing of the Malignant partie, and all seditious Sectaries and others, who al∣else may soon embroyle us in new Wars? And whether the setling of such a Militia will not be a better security, and lesse charge to the Kingdome then an Army, or capitulating mercenary Souldiers? 9. Whether the deduction of Free quarter and undue Taxes levyed on the Country by Souldiers out of their pay, will not satisfie most of their preten∣ded Arrears, if duly examined? And since sew or no Souldiers are so just or conscionable as to pay their quarters duly, when they have once their monies in their purses; Whether it be not necessary to deduct all Souldiers quarters for the future out of their pay at every muster, to satisfie the Counties where they billet; and to allow them to take free quarter (who else wil take it with∣out allowance or payment for it) and to disband or punish such upon com∣plaint, who will not be contented with such ordinary quarters as the Country (in this time of dearth) may reasonably afford them, at the rates deducted for it
out of their pay? Without which course and due payment of quarters by the Treasureis, out of their pay, or each Counties Contributions to ward the Army, upon tickets, or proof of the Free quarter taken upon Oath before the Com∣mittees of Accounts in each County, the Country will be totally ruined, and at last inforced (as many fear) to rise up in mutinies, both against the Souldiers and Parliament too, as unable to bear the intollerable burden of free quanter, and pay Excise and Taxes too, even for that the Souldiers eat and drink at free cost, as they now do in many places? 9. Whether a speedy examination and exemplary punishment of all undue practises in Elections already made: and an Ordinance to this effect; That all the Electors of Knights or Burgesses for the Parliament, shall immediately before their Elections take an Oath, without either fear, favour, or affection, to elect such persons to serve in Parliament, as in their judgements & consciences are most sufficient, able and discreet to discharge that trust for the common good; and that such who either directly or indirectly canvis or make open or private suite for any such place, shall be absolutely disabled to sit in Parlia∣ment, though returned; would not be a ready means to prevent all future complaints of undue Elections, and ease the House of very much trouble and the people of long attendance and much expence, now spent about Elections; and so necessary to be Ordained? 10. Whether it be not necessary or expedient to redeem all Impropriations in the possession of Colledges, Hospitals, and Free-Schools, by setling demesn Lands of Deans and Chapters of equall value on them by way of exchange? And whether the speeding of the Ordinance for surveying and returning the true yearly value of all Church livings, Impropriations, Deans and Chapters Lands in every County, and for the uniting and dividing of Parishes and aug∣menting the means of such as are incompetent upon the return thereof, will not be an effectuall means for the settlement of our Church; and the onely me∣thodicall way to make all livings competent? 11. Whether the speedy setling of the great Seal of England in able and tru∣sty hands, the confining the Chancery to its due bounds, the reducing of penall Bonds to a lesse forfaiture (as 120. l. for not payment of 100. l. at the day to prevent suits in Chancery) and filling the Courts up with able Judges, will not prove a great advancement of Justice and benefit to the Subject? 12. Whether the delayes and difference about the Ordinance for Oxford will not proove mischevous to the University, the whole Church and King∣dome, if long continued? And whether all private differences, ends, interests, formalities, should not alwayes give way to publike Accommodations and Advantages, especially in Parliaments? FINIS. LONDON, Printed by I. M. for M. Spark, at the Bible in Green  MDCXLVII.
