P422 E393_8 99862091 160300
SEVERALL POYSONOUS AND SEDICIOUS PAPERS OF Mr. DAVID JENKINS ANSVVERED. By H. P. BARRESTER of Lincolnes Inne. LONDON: Printed for Robert Bostock dwel∣ling in Pauls Church yard, at the Signe of the Kings Head. 1647.
THE VINDICATION OF JUDGE JENKINS Prisoner in the TOWER, the 29. of April, 1647. I Was convened upon Saturday the 10. of this moneth of April before a Committee of the House of Commons, where∣in Mr Corbet had the Chair; and I was there to be exami∣ned upon some Questions then to be propounded to me; to which Questions I refused to give any other Answer then that which was set down in a paper I then delivered to the said Mr. Corbet, which followeth in these words. Gentlemen, I stand committed by the House of Commons for high Treason, fo not acknowledgin, nor obeyin the Power of the two Houses, by adhering to the king in this War. I deny this to b Treason; For the supreame and onely Power by the Laws of the Land is in the king. If I should subit to any exa∣mintion derived from your Power, which by the Neative oath stands in opposition to the Kings Powe, I should contesse the Power to be in you, and so condemne my  for a Traytor, which I neither ought no will do. I am sworn to obey the King, and the Laws of this Land: you have not power to examine m b the Laws, but by the Kings Writ, Pattent, or Commission; if yo ca produce of her there∣of, I will answer the queions you shall ppound; otewise I cannot answer thereto, without the breach of my Oath, and the violation of the Laws, which I wil not do to save my life. You your selves, all of you this Parliamen, have sworn that the King is our onely and supreme Governor: you Protestation,
your Vow and Covenant, your solemn League and Covenant, your Declarations, all of them publish to the Kingdom, that your scope is the maintenance of the Laws; those Laws are and must be derived to us, and enlivened by the onely supreme Go∣vernor, the Fountain of justice, and the life of the Law, the King. The Parliaments are called by his Writs; the Judges sit by his Pattents, so of all other Officers; the Cities and Towns corpo∣rate, govern by the Kings Charters; and therefore since by the Law I cannot be examined by you, without a power derived by His Majesty, I neither can, nor will, nor ought you to examine me upon any questions. But if as private Gentlemen, you shall be pleased to ask me any questions, I shall really and truly an∣swer every such question, as you shall demand. April 10. 1647. David Jenkins. This paper hath been misrepresented to the good people of this City by a printed one, styling it my Recantation, which I own not; and besides is in it self repugnant (just like these times) the Body fals out with the Head. To vindicate my self from that Recantation, and to publish to the world the realitie of the pa∣per then delivered to Mr. Corbet, and the matter therein con∣tained, I have published this ensuing Discourse. No person who hath committed Treason, Murther, or Felony, hath any assurance at all for so much as one houre of life, lands or goods, without the Kings gracious pardon. 27 H. 8. ca. 24. The King is not virtually in the two Houses at Westminster, whereby they may give any assurance at all to any person, in any thing, for any such offence. 1. The House of Commons hath declared to the Kingdom in their Declaration of the 28. of November last to the Scots Papers, pa. 8. That the King at this time is not in a condition to govern. No per∣son or thing can derive a vertue to other men, or things, which it self hath not: and therefore it is impossible that they should have a vertue from the King to govern, which they, declare he hath not himself to give. 2. The Law of the Land is, Eliz. c. 1. That no person in any Parliament
hath a voice in the Huse of Commons, but that he stands a person to all intents and purpses as if he had never been elected or returned, if before he sit in the House, he take not his Oath upon the holy Evangelists, that the Kings Majesty is the onely and supreme Governour over all persons in all Causes. All the Members of the said House have taken it, and at all times as they are returned do take it; otherwise they have no colour to intermeddle with the publick▪ Affairs. How doth this solemn and legall Oath agree with their said Declaration, That the King is in no condition to govern. By the one it is sworn, He is the onely supreme Governor; by the other that he is not in a condition to govern. 3. The Oath is not, that the King was, or ought to be, or had been, before he was seduced by ill Counsell, our onely and su∣preame Governor in all Causes, over all persons; but in the pre∣sent tense, that he is our onely and supreame Governor, at this present, in all causes, and over all persons. So they the same per∣sons swear one thing, and declare to the Kingdom the contrary of the same thing, at the same time, in that which concerneth the weal of all this Nation. 4. The Ministers in the Pulpits do not say, what they swear in the House of Commons. Who ever heard sithence this unna∣turall warre, any of their Presbyters attribute that to his Maje∣stie which they swear? The reason is, their Oath is taken at West∣minster amongst themselves: that which their Ministers pray and teach, goes amongst the people. To tell the people that the King is now their onely and supreame Governor in all causes, is con∣ttrary to that the Houses do now practise, and to all they act and maintain. They, the two Houses forsooth, are the onely and supreame Governors in default of the King, for that he hath left his great Counsell, and will not come to them, and yet the King desires to come, but they will not suffer him, but keep him pri∣soner at Holdenby: so well do their actions and Oths agree. 5. They swear now King Charles is their onely and supreame Governor; but with a resolution at the time of the Oath taking, and before and after, that he shall not be onely or supreame Go∣vernor, or onely and supreame, but not any Governor at all: For there is no point of Government, but for some yeers past they
have taken to themselves, and used his name onely, to abuse and deceive the people. 6. That this vertuall power is a meer fiction, their Proposi∣tins sent to Oxford, to Newcastle, to be signed by the King, do prove it so. What needs this ado, if they have the vertuall Power with them at Westminste? 7. To affirm that the Kings Power (which is the vertue they talk of) is separable from his person, is high Treason by the Law of the Land: which is so declared by that learned man of the aw, Si Edward Cook; so much magnified by this present Parliament, who  7. part of his Reports in Calvins case, fol. 11 saith thus. In the Reign of Edw: 2. he Sponcers, the Father, ad Son,  hatchd in their harts, invented this damnable and  pinion, that homage a doath of ligeance was more by rea∣s Kings Crwn, (that is, of his politck capacity) then by reason of h persn of  King; upon whih pinion they inferred hree execrable and . 1. I the King do not demean himself by reason in the right of his Cron, his  are bound by Oath to remove th King. 2 Seeing that the King could not be rformed  of that ought to be done per aspertee: that is, by frce. 3. That his lieges be bound to govern in aid of him, and in : All whih were condemned by two Parliaments, one in the Reign of Ed: 2. calld xilium Hugonis le Spencer; and the other in Anno 1 Edw: 3. cap 2. And that the naturall body and politick makes one indivi∣sible body, and that these two bodies incorporate in one person make one body, and not divers, is resolved as the Law of Eng∣land, 4. Eiz: Plowdon Com: fol: 213. by Si Rbert Calin, Lord Chief Justice of England, , Lord Chief Jusice of the Common Pease; the Lord Saders, Lord Chief baron of the Exchequer, and by the rest o the Juges, viz. , Justice  Justice Corbet, Justice Weston baron and  Sergeants▪  General.  Atturey of the Turchy:  the learned it man of that age, in the knwdg of the Law, and Cuomes of the Relm. 8. The Law in all  without any  is and been:2 H.  Mana Chata. That no Act of Parliament  the Subjcts of the Lrd
without the assent of the King,So in every age till this day, and in every Kings time, as ap∣pears by the Acts in print 1 part of the Instit. Sect. 234. in fine. where many of the Law-Books are ci∣ted. either for Person, Lands, goods, or fame. No man can shew any fillable, letter, or line to the contrary in the books of the Law, or printed Acts of Parliament, in any age in this Land. If the vertuall Power be in the Houses, there needs no assent of the Kings. The stiles of the Acts printed from 9 H. 3. to 1 H. 7. were either, The King ordains at this Parliament, &c. or the King ordaineth by the advice of his Prelates and Bar∣rons, and at the humble Petition of the Commons, &c. In Hen. 7. his time the Stile altered, and hath sithence continued thus, It is ordained by the Kings Majestie, and the Lords Spirituall and Temporall, and Commons in this present Parliament as∣sembled. So that alwayes the Assent of the King giveth the life to all,7 H. 7. 14. 12 of H. 7. 20 as the soul to the body; and therefore our Law Books call the King, the Fountain of Justice, and the life of the Law. 9. Mercy as well as Justice belongs by the Law of the Land onely to the King.2 H. 4. ca. 22. 4 pars instit. 42. This is confessed by Mr. Prin, and it is so without any question: The King can onely pardon, and never more ause to have sufficient pardons then in such troublesome times as these;Mr. Prinn in his Treatise of the great Seal, fol. 17. 27 H. 8. c. 24. and God send us pardons and peace. None can give any pardon, but the King by the Law of the Land: The whole and sole power of pardoning Treasons and Felonies belongs to the King, are the words of the Law, and it is a delusion to take it from any other, and utterly invalid. 27▪ H. 8. ca. 24. 10. Queen Elizabeth summoned her first Parliament, to be held the 23. of Janna. in the first yeer of her Majesties Reign. The Lords and Commons assembled by force of the same Writ, the 23. day the Queen fell sick, and could not appear in her per∣son in Parliament that day, and therefore prorogued it untill the 25. of the same moneth of Januarie.3 Eliz. Dier 203. Resolved by all the Judges of England, that the Parliament began not the day of the return of the Writ, viz: the 23. of January, when the Lords and Commons appeared; but the 25. of the said moneth, when the King came in person: which sheweth evidently that this vertuall presence is a meer deluding fiction that hath no ground in Law, reason, or sense. They have the King now a Prisoner at Holdenby, with guards upon him, and yet they govern by the vertuall Power of their Priso∣ner. These are some few of the causes and reasons which moved
me to deliver that paper to Mr. Corbet, which I am readie to ∣stifie with my life, and should hold it a great honour to the honourable an holy Laws of the Land: That save this Land fro truction, is an Act of Oblivion, Majesties gracious all pardon, the Souliers their and every man his , and Truth and Peace established in nd, and a favourable regard had to the satisfaction of Consciences. April 29. 1647. David Jenkins. An ANSWER to the Poysonous Seditious Paper of Mr. David Jenkins. MR. David Jenkins in his Paper of the 29. of April last, lay most odious charges upon the Parliament: and conse∣quently upon all that have adhered to the Parliament in this Warre; and les these his desperate infusions should not work powerfully enough upon the vulgar; he being an ancient pra∣ctiser in the Law, and promoted to the title of a Judge: he cites Book cases aganst the two Houses, and seems forward to lay down his life in the cause. His 1. Argument runs thus. The Parliament not having the Kings Writ, Patent or Commission, cannot do so much as exa∣mine any man: But the Parliament has not the Kings Writ, &c. Ergo: his minor is confirmed thus. If the Kings power remain solely in himself, and be not vertually present in the two Houses, then they cannot pretend his Writ, Pattent or Commission. But the Kings power is in himself, and not vertually in the two Huses, ergo, that the Parliament has no vertuall power, he proves thu▪ 1. If the Parliament had in them the Kings vertuall Power, they needed not desire the Kings ratification: they needed not
send any Propositions to him; but now they send Propositions, ergo this vertuall power is but a meer fiction. To affim that the Kings power is separable from his per∣son, is by the Law adjudged high Treason: but in the Parliament the Kings Power is vertually in them, then they separate it his person Ergo. 3. If none can pardon Felony or Treason except the King, one has the virtual power of the King, but none can pardon except the King, Ergo, 4. If the King be in no condition to govern, then he is in no condition to derive virtuall power, but, &c. 5. If none can sit in Parliament but he must first swear that the the onely Supreame Governor over all Persons in all Causes, then, no Member of the Parliament, nor the whole Parlia∣ment, can suppose him or themselves superiour to the King: but none can sit in Parliament, &c. Ergo, I no Act of Parliament binde the Subject without the Kings , then there is no virtuall power in the Parliament without the Kings assent; but no Act binds, &c. Ergo, Out of these premises which this grave Gentleman judges to be rrefragable, he concludes that the Parliament denies the King to be Supreame Governor, nay to be any Governor at all, in as as there is no point of government, He sayes but th Par∣liament for some yeers past have taken to themselves using the Kings name, onely to abuse and deceive the people. He saies further, the Parliament pretends against the King, because that he ha left the great Counsell, and yet the King desires to come to his great Counsell, but cannot because he is by them kept at Holmby. he saies the Houses are guilty of pejuras well as of the  the people, and rebelling against the King; in as much as at the same time they swear him to be onely  Go∣vernor, and declare him to be in no condition to govern. How easily these things may be answered, and refuted, let the world see. cannot be denyed: but the Parliament sits by the Kings Writ, nay if Statute Law be greater then th Kings Writ, it cannot be denyed but the Parliament  or ough to  by something greater then then the Kings , And, if it be con∣fessed
that the Parliament sits by the Kings Writ, but does not Act by the Kings Writ, then it must follow that the Parliament is a void vain Court, and sits to no purpose; nay it must also fol∣low, that the Parliament is of lesse Authority, and of lesse use then any other inferiour Court. Forasmuch as it is not in the Kings power to controul other Courts, or to prevent them from sitting or Acting. 2. This is a grosse non sequitu the Kings power is in himself, Ergo it is not derived to, nor does reside virtually in the Parlia∣ment. For the light of the Sun remains imbodied, and unexhaust∣ed in the Globe of the Sun, at the same time as it is diffused and displayed through all the body of the air; and who sees not that the King without emptying himself, gives Commissions daily of Oier and Terminer to others, which yet he himself can nei∣ther frustrate nor elde? But for my part I conceive it is a great errour to infer that the Parliament has onely the Kings power, because it has the Kings power in it: for it seems to me that the Parliament does  sit and act by concurrent power, devoved both from the King and Kingdom; And this in some things is more obvious and apparent then in others. For by what power does the Parliament grant Subsedies to the King? if onely by the power which the King gives, then the King may take Subsedies without any grant from the Parliament: and if it be so by a power which the people give to the Parliament, then it will fol∣low, that the Parliament has a power given both by King and Kingdom. 3. The sending Propositions to the King, and desring his concurrence, is scarce worth an Answer; for Subjects may hum∣bly petition for that which is their strict right and property. Nay it may sometimes beseem a superior to prefer a suit to an inferior for matters in themselves due. God himself has not ut∣terly disdained to beseech his own miserable, impious, unwor∣thy creatures: besides 'tis not our Tenet that the King has no power, because he has not all power; nor that the King cannot at all promote our happinesse, because he has no just claim to procure our ruine. 4. We affirm not that the Kings power is separated from his person so as the two Spensers affirmed; neither do we frame con∣clusions out of that separation as the two Spensers did, either
that the King may be removed or misdemenors, or reformed per aspertee; or that the Subject is bound to govern in aid of him; we onely say, that his power is distinguishable from his person: and when he himself makes a distinction betwixt them, com∣manding one thing by his Legall Writes, Courts and Officers; and commanding another thing extraudicially by word of mouth, letters, or Ministers, we are to obey his Power rather then his Person. 5. We take not from the King all power of pardoning Delin∣quents, we onely say it is not proper to him quarto modo. For if the King pardon him which has murdered my son, his pardon shall not ut me off from my appeal: and 'tis more unreasona∣ble that the Kings pardon should make a whole State which has suffered remedilesse, then any private man. So if the King should deny indemnity to those which in the fury of war have done things unjustifiable by the Laws of Peace, and thereby keep the wounds of the State from being bound up, 'tis equia∣ble that an Act of Indemnity should be made forcible another way. And if this will not hold, yet this is no good consequence the King is absolute in point of pardons, therefore he is absolute in all things else; and the Parliament has no power to discharge Delinquenties, therefore it has no power in other matters. 6 The Parliament has declared the King to be in no condi∣tion to govern: but this must nor be interpreted rigidly, and without a distinction: for if the King with his sword drawn in his hand, and pursuing the Parliament and their adherents as Rebels, be not fit for all Acts of Government,  not hereby insinuated that he is  o the habit or righ of governing. be unqified now,  is not  for the future. If he may not do things destructive to the Parliament, he is not from returning to the Parliament, or doing  to the Par∣liament. This is a frivelous civill, and suberfuge. 7 We swear that the King is our supreame Governor over all Persons, and in all causes; but we do not swear that he is above all Law, nor above the  of his people, which is the end of the Law, and indeed Paramout to the Law it self. I he be above all Law, or lyable to no restaint of ou Law, then we are the French, or the Tks; ad if he be above the prie end of Law common safety, then we are not so  the
French, or the Turks. For if the totall subversion of the French or the Turk were attempted they might by Gods law imprinted in the book of nature justifie a self-defence; but we must remedi∣lesly perish when the King pleases to command our throats. Be∣sides, how acheived the King of England such a Supremacy above all Law, and the community it self, for whose behoof Law was made? If Gods donation be pleaded, which is not spe∣ciall to him, or different from what other Kings may pretend too, then to what purpose serve our Laws, nay to what purpose serve the Laws of other Countreys? for by this generall dona∣tion, all Nations are condemned to all servitude as well as we. If the Law of this Land be appealed to, what Books has Mr. Jen∣kins read, where has he found out that Lex Regia, whereby the people of England have given away from themselves all right in themselves? Some of our books tell us that we are more free then the French, that the King cannot oppresse us in our persons, or estates, by imprisonment, denying justice, or laying taxes without our consents: other books tell us, that the safety of the people is the supreame law, and that the King has both God and the Law for his Superior. But all this is nothing to learned Mr. Jenkins. 8. We admit that no Acts of Parliament are compleat, or for∣mally binding without the Kings assent: yet this is still to be de∣nyed, that therefore without this assent particularly exprest, the two Houses can do nothing, nor have any virtuall power at all, no not to examine Mr. Jenkins, nor to do any other thing of like nature, though in order to publick justice and safetie. I have done, and wish Mr. Jenkins would call in, and lick up again his black, infamous, execrable reproaches, so filthily vomited out against the Parliament. The Reply of Judge Jenkins to Mr. H. P. AFter the said Mr. H. P. hath made a recitall of the Heads of my Vindication, he deduceth his Answer unto eight Par∣ticulars.
To the first. I Was examined by a Committee appointed by the House of Commons: I say and said that the House of Commons have no power to examine me, for that it is no Court, every Court hath power to examine upon Oath, this power the House of Commons never claimed;5 H 4 c. 3. The Court of Pie-Powders, Court-Baron, Hundred Court,3 H 6. 46. County Court, and every other Court of Record, or not of Record,19 H 6. 43. hath power to examine upon oath, and an examination without Oath,35 H. 6. 5. is a communication onely, exa∣mination in Law is upon oath. There is no Court without a power of triall,Sir Anthony Maynes case, Cook 5. pars, Reports, Lit. 2. lib. Sect. 194. 6 H. 4. 1. the House of Commons hath no power to try any offence, nor ever practised it by Bill, Inditement, Information, Plaint or Originall, to de∣duce it to triall, nor to try it by Verdict, Demurrer or Exami∣nation of witnesses upon Oath, without which there can be no condemnation or judgement; and that which can attain to no reasonable end, the Law rejects as a thing inutile, and uselesse: Sapiens incipit à fine. The Writ whereby they are called gives them power Ad fa∣ciendum & consentiendum,4 pars, Instit. fol 4. & 9. to what? to such things Quae ibidem de communi Consilio ordinari contigerint, (viz.) in the Parliament: This makes nothing at all for a Court for the House of Com∣mons; that consilium which that Writ intends, is cleared partly by the Writ for choosing Knights, &c. For the King by that Writ is said to resolve to consult and treat with the Prelates and Peers of the Kingdom, for and touching the great concernments of the Common-wealth (for the King never fits in the House of Commons;) and this also is made evident by the Writs to the Prelates, Peers, Judges, and to his Councell at Law; the words in their Writs are, To appear and attend the Parliament, Con∣silium impensure, the one doth consulere, the other facere & consen∣tire. The House of Lords,7 H 6. 28. where the King fits in person, assisted by his Lords,1 H 7. 20. Judges, Serjeants, Atturney, Sollicitor, Masters of the Chancery,14 E. 3. ca 5. is a Court of Record to many purposes, set down in the books of the Law,1 Pas, Instit. pa. 21. and the Statutes of the Land; and that Courts is onely in the House of Lords, where the King sits.
A Court must either be by the Kings Patent, Statute Law, or by the Common Law,Plowd Com. 319. which is common and conant usage; the House of Commons hath no Patent to be a Court, nor S∣tute Law to be a Court, nor common usage; they have no Book but since E. 6. time: was there ever Fine by the House of Commons etreated into the Excheque? For murther o Felony they can imprison no man, much esse for Treason; the House which cannot do the lesse cannot do the greater. I is ordained,25 E 3 c 4. that no man shall be imprisoned, or put out of his Franchise by the King or his Councell,3▪ Car Peti∣tion of Right. but upon Indict∣ment or presentment of his good and lawfull Neighbours, where the deed is done, or by originall Writ at the Common Law, and so is Lex terrae the Law of the Land, mentioned is Magna Charta. cap. 29 expounded; and the said Magna Charta and Charta , are declared by the Statute of 25 E 1. . to be the Common Law of the Land. All Judges and Com∣missioners are to proceed, Secundum legem & consuetudinem Regni Angliae, as appears by all proceedings in all Courts, and by all Commissions: and therefore the House of Commons by them∣selves proceeding not by Indictment, Presentment,  Origi∣nall Writ, have no power to imprison men, or to put them out of their Franchie. This no way trenches upon the Parliament,4 pars, Instit. pag 1 for it is in Law no Parliament withou King and both Houses;3 Pars. Instit. p. 3. I have onely in my Paper deivered to Mr. Corbet, applyed my self to that Com∣mittee, 12 H 7. 20. Prince case. that they had no power to examine me; but I never thought, said, or wrote, that the Parliament had no power to examine me:8 Pars▪ Cook. 1 Pars,  p 59. the Law and custome of this Land is, that a Par∣liament hath power over my life, liberty, lands and goods, and over every other Subject;1 H 8 3 but the House of Commons of it self hath no such power.Dier▪ 38 H 8 60 For the Lord Cooks relation, that the House of Commons have imposed ,1 Ps, Instit p 19 . and imprisoned men in Queen Ezths time, and since; Few facts of late time never power nor Court,4  stit ca. Parl. à  is no good for the words of the Statute of 6 H 8 c. 16 that a icence to dept from the House or Commons for any Member thereof is to be entred of Record in the Book or the Clark of the Par∣liament,
appointed, or to be appointed for that House, doth not conclude that the House of Commons is a Court of Re∣cord. For first, that Law of 6. H. 8. c. 26. handles no such question, as that, whether the House of Commons be a Court, it is a maxime in all Laws, Lex aliud tractans nil probat, the word (Re∣cord) there mentioned, is onely a memoriall of what was done and entered in a Book: A Plaint removed out of the County-Court to the Court of the Common-Pleas, hath these words in the Writ of remove,Fitzh Nat. Br 70 Recordari facias loquelam, &c. and yet the County-Court is no Court of Record, and so for ancient De∣mesne, Fih. Nat, Br 13. in a Writ of false judgement, the words are Recordari fa∣cias loquelam, &c. and yet the Court of ancient Demesne is no Court of Record;12 H 4. 23. and so of a Court Baron, the Law and cu∣stome of England must be preserved,34 H. 6. 49. or England will be destroy∣ed, and have neither Law nor custome. Let any man shew me, that the Court of Lords, or the House of Commons in any age hath made any man a Delinquent (Rege dissentiente) the King contradicting it under his Great Seal. Sir Gies Mompesson, Michel, and others of late were con∣demned by the prosecution of the House of Commons in King James his time; did King James ever contradict it? And so of ancient times,4 Pars, Instit. Tit. Parl. p. 23. where the House of Peers condemned Latimer in 50. E. 3. the Kings pardon freed him: which shews cleerly, that the Kings expresse or implyed assent must of necessity be had to make a Delinquent. The Gentleman saith, That the Parliament fits, or ought to sit by something greater then the Kings Writ, &c. No Parliament did ever sit without the Kings Writ, nor could ever Parliament begin without the Kings presence in person,4 Pars, Instit. p. 4. & 6. or by a Guardian of England by Patent under the Kings Great Seal, the King being in remotis, or by Commission under the Great Seal to certain Lords representing the Kings person, and hath been thus in all Ages unto this Session of Parliament, wherein his Majestie hath been pressed, and hath passed two Acts of Parliament, one for a Trienniall Parliament, and another for a perpetuall,4 E 3. c. 14. if the Houses please, to satisfie their desires;36 E. 3. c. 10. how these two Acts agree one with another, and with
Statute in E. the thirds time,21 Ic. the Act of Limitation of Actions, cap. 26. where Parliaments are ordained to be holden every yeer, and what mischiefs to the people of this Land such length of Parliaments will produce by prote∣ctions and priviledges, to free them and their meniall servants from all debts during their lives, if they please to continue it so long; and how destructive to mens actions against them, by reason of the Statute of Limitations, which confines their acti∣ons to certain yeers, and many other inconveniencies or greater importance, is easie to understand? How can any man affirm, that the two Houses do act now by the Kings Writ which relates to counsell and Treaty with the King,4 pars, Instit. pa. 14. concerning the King, the defence of his Kingdom, and of the Church of England, there are the three points which it tends to, as appears by the Writ. They keep their King prisoner at Holdenby, and will not suffer him to consult and treat with them.Vow and Co∣venant, p. 11. They have made a Vow and Covenant to assist the Forces raised and continued by both Houses against the Forces raised by the King without their consent; and to the same effect have devised the Oath which they call the Ne∣gative Oath: Is this to defend the Kings Kingdom, or their king∣dome? When by their solemne League and Covenant they extir∣pate Bishops, Deanes and Chapters root and branch, is this to defend the Church of England? (that Church must necessarily be meant, that was the Church of England when the said Writ bore test) they were not summoned to defend a Church that was not in being;3 Pars, Cook. Den and Chapter of Norwich. to destroy and defend the Church are very contrary things; the Church is not de∣fended, when they take away and sell the Lands of the Church. The Gentleman saith, The King cannot controll other Courts of Justice, or prevent them from sitting or acting, and therefore not the two Houses, &c. It is true, the King cannot controll or prevent his other Courts, for that they are his ordinarie Courts or common justice, to administer common  un∣to all men, according to the fixed Laws. The Houses make no Court without the King, they are no body Coporate without the King, nor Parliament without the King, they all
make one corporate body, one Court called the Parliament, wher∣of the King is the head,4 Pars, In∣stit. p. 1. and the Court is in the Lords house, where the King is present: and as a man is no man without a head, so the Houses severed from the King, as now they are, have no power at all, and they themselves by levying War against the King, and imprisoning of him, have made the State for not dissolving, ad∣journing, or proroging this Parliament of no effect, by the said Acts of their owne; they sit to no purpose without his assent to their Bills, they will not suffer him to consult with them, and treat and reason with them, whereby we may discerne what Bills are fit to passe, and what not, which in all Ages the Kings of this Land have enjoyed as their undoubted Rights, and therefore they sit to no purpose by their owne disobedience and fault. For the ordinary Courts at Westminster,27 H. 8. c. 24, 28. H. 8 11. Dier. the Iudges in all those Courts are Iudges by the Kings Patent or Writ, otherwise they are no Iudges: the Houses can make no Iudges, they are no Iudges at all who are made by them; the whole and sole power of mak∣ing Iudges, belongs to the King: the King cannot controle or pre∣vent his own Iudges from sitting or acting, but the Houses he may for they are not the Kings Iudges, but the Iudges of the two Hou∣ses. 2 R, 3. 11. In his other Courts, the King commits his power to his Iudges by his patent, and they are sworne to doe common right to all men, and the King is sworne not to let them from so doing: the King cannot judge in those Courts, nor controule; but the King is both Iudge and Controller in the Court of Parliament: Quoad. Acts, for his assent or dissent doth give life or death to all Bils. Many Lawyers have much to answer to God, this Kingdom, and to posterity, for puzling the people of this Land with such Fancies, as the Gentl▪ who wrote the Answer to my Paper, and others have published in these Troubles, which hath bin none of the least causes of the raysing and continuing of them: And so I have done with the first part of his answer. A. D. 2. For the Non sequitur, in the second Section of the Gent▪ An∣swer, the Antecedent and the Consequent are his own. Quem recitas meus est (ô Fidentine!) libellus: Sed malè dum recitas incipit esse tuus. My words are, that the King is not vertually in the two houses
at Westminster, to enable them to grant pardons, for that whole and sole power by the Law belongs to the King. My Paper hath no such thing, as that the KINGS power cannot be deri∣ved to others or the vertue of his power:27 H. c. 24. For His power, and the vertue of His power is in all Patents to his Iudges, in Char∣ters to Corporations, in Commissions of all sorts, and in the Par∣liament assembled by force of his Writ of Summons, so long as they obey him; but when they renounce that power, and claime it not from the King, and declare to the Kingdome that hee is not in condition to governe, and imprison him, and usurpe to them∣selves all Royall Authority, as the two Houses now doe, no reaso∣nable man can affirme that they act by the power of their Priso∣ner, who hath no power to give them, that by force of Arms take all the power to themselves. The Gentl. saith, the King grants Commissions daily of Oyer and Terminer,4 E 4, 39. which hee cannot frustrate nor elude.5 E. 44. The King may re∣voke and discharge the Commission by his Writ,1 E . Dyr 165. as hee may re∣move all Judges, and place other men in their roome; and many Kings death determines all the Iudges Parents of Westminster-Hall, 1 Mar. Broks case 447. Commissions of Oyer and Terminer, &c. and so hee might dissolve both Houses in all times, by his Writ under the Great Scale, untill that by this Parliament, by his owne concession, the King of his goodnesse hath secluded himselfe; which goodnes hath bin full ill requied. The Gentl. affirmes, That the power the Parliament hath, is con∣current from the King and Kingdome; which he conceives, is pro∣ved by the Grant of Subsidies to the King by the Parliament. The mistaking of this word (Parliament) hath beene mischievous in these times to this Land,4 Pars, in∣stit. p. 1. and it is affectedly mistaken, which makes the sinne the greater, for the two Houses are not the Parliament as before is declared; and at this time so to inculcate it, when all men know, that of the 120. Peeres of the Kingdom, who were tem∣porall Peeres before the troubles, there are not not above 30. in the Lords house, and in the house of Commons about 200. of the prime Gent. of the Kingdom left the House, and adhered to his Majesty, who is imprisoned by them, shews no such candor as to be desired It is true,25 Eliz. 1. Confirma∣tio charta∣rum, cap. 6. that no Tallage can be layd upon the People of this Land, but by their consent in Parliament, as appeareth by the Lawes mentioned in the margent, but you shall finde in Mr. Sel∣dens
learned Book,24 Eli. 1. cap. 1. de Tallagio non con∣cedendo. called Mare Clausum, a number of Presidents in Henry the thirds time for Ship-money, justly condemned this Parliament, to which his Majesty assented; and in truth, that Ship-money was condemned before, by the said two Statutes of 25. E. 1. & 34. E. 1. de Tallagio non concedendo. Dane-gelt, Englitery, and many grievous burthens were layd upon the people, and born, untill that memorable Princes time. But I am of opinion, that the Common Law of the Land did alwayes restraine Kings from all Subsidies and Tallages, but by consent in Parliament; which doth appeare by Magna Charta the last chap. where the Prelates, Lords, and Comminalty gave the King the fifteenth part of their move∣ables. In truth it is no manner of consequence, because the King cannot take what he pleaseth of the subjects goods, that therefore they have a concurrent power in Parliament: there have bin many Parliaments, and no Subsidies granted, Parliaments may be with∣out Subsidies, but Subsidies cannot be without Parliaments: of ancient time Parliaments rarely granted any unlesse it were in the time of forraine Wars; and in my time, Q. E. refused a Subsidie granted in Parliament, and in the Parliament of 1. Jac. none were granted. The Gent. should make a conscience of blinding the peo∣ple with such untrue colours, to the ruine of King and people. A. D. 3. The Gent. affirms, That the sending Propositions to the King, and desiring his concurrence, is scarce worth an answer, for Subjects may humbly petition for that which is their strict right and property, &c. The Propositions sent to Newcastle, are in print; wherein the two Houses are so farre from humbly petitioning, that they stile not themselves his Majesties Subjects, as appeares by the Propositions. That they have a strict right or property to any on of these Pro∣positions, is a strange assertion, every one of them being against the Lawes now in force: Have the two Houses a strict right and property, to lay upon the people what Taxes they shal judg meet? To pardon all treasons, &c. that is one of their Propositions. Have they a strict right and property to pardon themselves? and so for all the rest of their Propositions. These Propositions have been Voted by both Houses,12 H. 7. 20 the Kings assent (they being drawne into Bills) makes them Acts of Parlia∣ment: 1 Iac. c. 1. Hath the King no right to assent or dis-assent?1 Car. c. 7. Was the
sending but a Complement? All our Law-bookes and Statutes speak otherwise. This Gentl. and others, must give an account one time or other for such delusions put upon the people. A. D. 4. The Gent. saith, They affirme not, that the Kings power is separa∣ted from his person, so as the two Spencers affirmed, &c. His Maje∣sties person is now at Holnby under their Guards; have they not severed his power from him, when by no power they have left him, he can have two of his Chaplaines, who have not taken their Covenant to attend him for the exercise of his Conscience? For the three Conclusions of the Spencers,15 Ed. 2. Exilium Hugonis do not the two Hou∣ses act every of them? They say his Majesty hath broken his trust, touching the government of his people: They have raised Armies to take him,1 E 3. c. 2. Calv. case 7 Pars, Re∣ports 11. they have taken him, and imprisoned him; they go∣vern themselves; they make Laws, impose Taxes, make Iudges, Sheriffes, and take upon them omnia insignia summae potestatis: Is not this to remove the King for misdemeanours, to reforme per aspertè, to governe in aide of him; the three conclusions of the Spencers? Doe they think the good people of England are becom stupid, and will not at length see these things? The Gentl. saith,Plowd. 4. E. 213. the Kings power and his person are indivi∣sible. they doe not separate his power from his Person, but distinguish it, &c. His power is in his legall Writs, Courts, and Officicers: when they counterfeit the Great Seale, and seale Writs with the same, make Iudges themselves, Courts and Offi∣cers, by their own Ordinances against his consent, declared under his true Great Seale of England (not by word of mouth, letters, or ministers onely) their Seale is obeyed, their own Writs, their own Iudges, their owne Courts, their own Officers, and not the Kings: The time will come when such strange actions and dis∣courses will be lamented. A. D. 5. The Gentl. goes on,Stanfor. Pleas. 99. 27. H. 8. c. 24. Dier. 163. Wee take not from the King all power of par∣doning Delinquents, we only say it is not proper to him quarto modo, &c. What doe you meane by quarto modo? I am sure, Omnis Rex Angliae, solus Rex & semper Rex can doe it, and none else: read the bookes of the Law to this purpose collected by that Reverend and learned Iudge Stanford, from all antiquity to his time, who dyed in the last yeare of King Philip and Queene Maries Reigne,
you shall find this a truth undenyable; and this power was never questioned in any age in any book by any untill this time, that eve∣ry thing is put to the question: You Gentlemen who professe the Law, and maintaine the party against the King, return at length, and bring not so much scandall upon the Law, (which preserves all) by publishing such incredible things. We hold only what the Law holds,1 Pars. In∣stit. p. 44. Plowd. 3. Eliz. 236, 237. the Kings Prerogative and the Subjects Liberty are determined, and bounded, and measured by the written Law what they are; we do not hold the King to have any more power, neither doth His Majesty claime any other but what the Law gives him; the two Houses by the Law of this Land have no colour of power, either to make Delinquents, or pardon Delinquents, the King contradicting: (and the Army un∣der Sir Thomas Fairfax (howbeit but Souldiers) do now under∣stand that to be Law, and doe now evidently see and assuredly know, that it is not an Ordinance of the two Houses, but an act of Parliament, made by the King, Lords and Commons that will se∣cure them, and let this Army remember their executed fellow Souldiers) And the Law was alwayes so taken by all men untill these troubles, that have begot Monsters of Opinions. A. D. 6. The Gentl. sayes, The Parliament hath declared the King to be in no condition to Governe, &c. There is no end of your distinctions, I and you profess the Law, shew me Law for your distinctions, or letter, syllable, or line, in any age in the Bookes of the Law, that the King may in one time be in no condition to govern, and yet have the habit of governing, and another time he may (viz.) when the two Houses will suffer him: the Law saith thus, Vbi lex non distinguit, non est distinguendum. Hee sayes, The King is not barred from returning to His Parlia∣ment, (as he calls the two Houses) he knowes the contray, the whole City knowes the contrary, No juris consulti sumus sacerdo∣tes, (as Justinian the Emperour hath it, in the first Book of his In∣stitutions) and therefore knowledge and truth should come from our lips: Worthy and ingenious men will remember, and reflect upon that passage of that good and wise man Seneca, Non quaitur, sed qua eundum; follow not the rayes of the Lawyers of the House of Commons. God forgive them, I am sure the King will if they be wise and seeke it in time.
A D. 7. The Gentl. sayes, We sweare that the King is our supreame Gover∣nor over all persons and in all causes, &c. Why hath he left out the word (only?) for the oath the Members now take, is, that KING Charles is now the only and supreme Governour in all causes,5 Eliz. c. 1. Cawdreys case 5 pars, fol. 1. over all persons, and yet they keep their only Supreme Governour now in prison, and act now in Parliament by vertue of their Prisoners Writ, and by a concurrent power in this Parliament, and by their own strict right and property, (as the Gentl. affirmes in his an∣swer) these things agree well with their Oath,This Oath is allowed by the Common Law of the Land. that the King is the only Supreme Governour in all causes, over all persons; this Oath is taken now in the Parliament time, by all the Members of the House of Commons, and is required by the Law to bee taken in all Parliaments, otherwise they have no power, nor colour to meddle with the publike affaires. This Oath being taken in Parliament, that the King is the only and Supreme Governour in all causes, then it followes in Parliament causes; ever all persons, then over the two Houses; let them keep this Oath, and we shall bee sure of peace in the Land: and good Lawyers ought to desire peace, both for the publike good and their private, and not dishonour that Noble profession, as many doe in this miserable time. The Gent. sayes, We do not sweare that the King is above all Law, nor above the safety of his people; neither doe we so sweare, but His Majesty and we will sweare the contrary, and have sworne, and have made good, and will by Gods grace make good our Oath to the world, that the King is not above the Law, nor above the safe∣ty of his people, the Law and the safety of his people are his safe∣ty, his honour and his strength. A D. 8. The Gentl. concludes, That Acts of Parliament are not formally binding, nor compleat without the Kings assent, yet the Houses have a virtuall power without the Kings particular assent, to doe things in or∣der to publike Justice and safety, (viz.) In setting up the Excise, in raising and maintaining of Armies, in taxing the people at plea∣with fifth and twentieth part, fifty Subsidies, Sequestrations, Lones, Compositions, imprisoning the King, abolishing the
Common-Prayer-Book, selling the Churches Lands, &c. all these are in order to publike Iustice and safety. Mr. H. P. you are of my profession, I beseech you, for the good of your Country, for the Honour of our Science, perswade your selfe and others, as much as in you lyes, to believe and follow the monition and Councell of that memorable, reverend, and pro∣foundly Learned in the Lawes and Customs of the Land, the Lord Coke, who writes as becomes a great and a learned Iudge of the Law (a person much magnified by the two Houses) in these words: Peruse over all Bookes,3 Pars, Inst p. 36. Records and Histories, and you shall finde a Principle in Law, a Rule in Reason, and a tryall in Experience, that Treason doth ever perduce fatall and finall destruction to the offender, and never attaines to the desired end (two incidents inseperable thereun∣to) and therefore let all men abandon it, as the poysonous bait of the de∣vill, and follow the Precept in holy Scripture, SERVE GOD, HO∣NOƲR THE KING, AND HAVE NO COMPANY WITH THE SEDITIOƲS. CONCLUSION. I Say againe, that without an Act of Oblivion, a Gracious gene∣rall pardon from his Majesty, the Arreares of the Souldiers payd, a favourable regard had to tender Consciences, there will bee neither Truth nor Peace in this Land, nor any man secure of any thing he hath. The End.
