S275 E1678_1 99868036 170251
Enchiridion Medicum: AN ENCHIRIDION Of the Art of PHYSICK. Methodically Prescribing Remedies In such an Order. That it may be accounted To the Sick-man a SANCTUARY, AND To the Studious a LIBRARY: CONTAINING A Salubrious Remedy for every Malady incident to the body of Man. Very necessary to be known and under∣stood of all that desire their own Health. Written in Latine, by our learned Country-man JOHN SADLER Dr. in Physick: Translated, revised, corrected and augmented By R. T. London, Printed by J. C. for R. Moone at the se∣ven Stars, and Henry Fletcher at the three gilt Cups in Pauls Church-yard. 1657.
To his worthily respected friend, Mr. Christoph. Woodhouse of BERKHAMSTEED in the County of Hertford, Doctor in Physick. SIR, I Remember amongst the le∣genda aurea of the antient Philosophers, it is recorded of Aristippus, Scholar to Socra∣tes, that Cum civibus aliquot suis navigans naufragio es eje∣otus; quum in littore vidisset figur as Mathematicos in littore depictas: salva, inquit, res est
Amici, hominum vestigia con∣spicio. Et ingressus civitatem proxima investigavit, qui nam essent illic disciplinarum studi∣osis, cum his ubi congressus est summa cum humanitate tracta∣runs non ipsum modo, verum & etiam comites illius. &c. When he was at Sea with some of his Country-men, they were by Shipwrack cast upon the shore of a strange country Aristippus perceiv∣ed some Mathematical figures drawn in the sands: Be of good comfort friends (quoth he) for I see the steps of men: assuring himself and his com∣pany, that there he saw the
Emblems of Vertue, and that the Students therein could not be far distant; from whom they might expect courteous entertainment: and so they found it. Sir, I am much encouraged to present this little Piece to you, having seen your steps; and in this tempestuous age, wherein there is a Shipwrack of almost all delightful stu∣dies, the steps of men, of lovers of Minerva, appearing about your coasts: I say, this comfort affords me so much confidence, as to presume this Translation will be accep∣table to you: rejoycing that
some plants of Apollo flourish in your pleasant playns; so that I desire you amongst the rest to receive this little branch within your walls; from whence I doubt not but you will gather profitable fruits: which is the Ambition of Yours really to serve you, Robert Turner. London, ult. Novemb. 1656.
To the Reader. CUstome rather then Necessity engages me, because I must not be out of the fashion, to put a Preface before this book; in which I shall be as brief as may be: for I brooke not Prolixity, nor long-winded Lectures: semel dictum sapien∣ti, sat est. Then Reader let me only tell you, (if you know not already) that this is a Translation of the Praxis Medicorum of Doctor Sadler, with the addition of many private Receipts and Experiments of the ablest Physitians now in practice. Indeed I was the rather induced to put this into English, because it was the language of a City-Do∣ctor, that he had rather the book were burnt, then I should see it; which I
hearing of, soon procured one of them, and now freely communicare in unto all my Country-men; hope∣ing it will sprout like the Camo∣mile, the better being trod on; and give pleasant and profitable fruit to all that desire it; as doth Robert Turner. Ult. Novemb. 1656.
The Contents Tabulated Alphabetically. A ASthma Page, 6. Antidotes 8. 62, 63. Astringents 24. Abortion 74. 89. B. Bolusses 9. 10, 11. Bladder ulcerated 12. Pain in the bladder 56. Barrenness 77. Spitting bloed 117. Bladder excoriated 128. C. Cordial-water 3. 4. Cholick 11. 25, 58. Choler 22. 36, 44 98. Collyries 27. 28.
Condites Cordial 32. 33 Cancers 38. Cough 67. 71, 72, 73, 103, 135. Catarrh 70. 107, 135. Cornes 110. Cramp 175. 237. Conception 143. D. Cecoctions 34 35. Dropsy 46. 47, 49, 70, 92, 116, 121. 131, 132 Esy deliverance 57. E. Eyes inflamed 27. Watry-Eyes 28. Eyes ulcerated 29. Eyes dym and itching 29. 30, 31, 32. E. Epilepsy 51. Electuaries 51. Epithcmes 110. Pain in the Eares 125. Eclgme 132.
F. Flegme 23. 37, 99. Feavers 35. 96, 110, 115, 130. French-Pox 39. 41, 54. Falling-sickness 51. 52, 66. Flix 63. 64, 111. Feaver-hectick 78. Fomentations 101. Red Face 103. G. Gout 11. 107, 113, 124. Gonorrhea 54. 55. Pain in the Guts 59. Gargarismes 106. 107. H. Head-ach 24. 25, 110. To comfort the heart 57. 62. Hoarseness 69. Hicket 74. Hemorrhoids 97.
I. Intestines 26. Infection 34. Tellow Iaundise 97. 110. Incessions 112. Juleps 114. K. Lungs Corrupted 10. 75. Liver inflamed 49. 73, 97, 126. L. Looseness 58. 63, 64. Liver obstructed 64. Liniments 121. To stir up lust 123. Lohoh 134. M. Melancholy 23. 38, 43, 45, 46, 119, 120. Suffocations of the matrix 52. Minde-distempers 182. Matrix coming down 88. 100. Palate of the Mouth 111
Milks 128. 129. Masticatories 237. A Pessary for the Molo 143. O. Obstructious 42. 43 49. P. Physick 4. 5. Pleurisy 21. 22, 36, 37 99, 103, 117, 118, 119, 135. Plague 61. 62, 63. Palsey 67. 122. Plaisters 99. Small-Pox 109. Pessaries 239. Pills 142. Q. Quinsy 84. 107. 108. R. Reynes ulcerated 12. 56, 80. Reynes inflamed 14. 18, 19, 51, 54, 55, 102.
Rupture 20. 78. S. Stone 1. 2, 3, 12, 55 60 112. Stomach 7. 14 15, 16▪ 71. Splcen 17. 45. 97, 82. Weak sight 67. 68. Sleep to procure 81. 101. 122. Swooning 93. Scabs 103. Scurvy 105. T. Tearmes to bring down 7. 65, 126, 238. 239. Tumors 20. Tympany 25. To stop the Tearmes 66. 175. Tooth-ach V. Ʋentricles to strengthen 5. Ʋrine to cool 13. 53, 129. Ʋlcers 12. 13. Vomiting 15. 16, 103. Venereal pain 8. 39.
Ʋrine to provoke 48. To provoke venery 65. W. Womb swelled 18. Watrish humors 40. 76. Winde 60. 61▪ 97. Such as cannot hold their water 60. 61, 80. Wormes 103, 127. Whites 106. 107, 108. Womb swelled 102.
THE Sick Mans Sanctuary: Or, the Studious Mans Library: Wherein The Remedy of every Malady is ranged into an Alphabeti∣call Order. CHAP. 1. Aquae; or, Waters. A Water for the Stone. TAke of Straw-berryes one pound and a half, Spirit of Wine two pound, Juyce of Lem∣mons three ounces; mingle them, and let them be infused for the space of twen∣ty dayes; afterwards put up in conve∣nient
glasses: and the dose of it is one ounce. Another Water for the Stone. Take of the Water of Camomile, the Water of Pellitory; Ivy with the Berryes, Horse-Radish root, Parsly, the Water of Fennel with the roots, of Broom Flowers, Thime, of each one pound and a half; white-Wine four pound, Venice Turpentine two pound, the Seeds of Annis, and Caraway, of each half a pound; Grummel Seed three ounces, Cinamon one ounce and half, the Roots of Sperage two ounces; Let such be pulverized, as are to be: Mingle them, and distil them according to art: the dose is two ounces and a half, with white-Wine and Sugar; of each one ounce. A Water to disperse the Stone. Take of the Water of Parsly, Straw-berries, the best Wine, of each two pound; tart Maligo one pound: first mingle both the waters, and then the Wine, with one pound of white Sugar,
continually stirring of it; exposing it to the Sun for the space of eight dayes: the dose is three spoonfulls morning and night before Supper. Another Water against the Stone. Take the four quarters of a hare, white-Wine four pound, the Flowers of Camomile and Broom, of each one p. and a half, Juniper berries, he Seeds of stone-Crop, Parsly, Grummel and Annis, of each one ounce; pure Tur∣pentine three ounces, Nutmeg half an ounce; distil them together: the dose is three ounc. upon an empty stomack; and after it is taken, walk three hours. A Cordial and heart-chearing Water. Take the VVaters of Borage, Bug∣loss, and Rosemary, of each half a pound; Rose-water three pound, Mali∣go-Sack two pound, Cinamon 3 ounces and half; Nutmegs three ounc. of all the Sanders of each half an ounce; Mace, Citron Pill, Cloves, Ivory shavings,
sweet Cane, Setwel, the Roots of Enu∣lacampane, Angelico, of each half an ounce; Galangal three dragmes: Let these be distilled according to art; the dose of the VVater is two ounces, with one dragme of Manus Christi dissolved therein. Another Cordial VVater. Take of Cloves, Ga∣langa, Aq. Mirabilis Coll. Physic. London. Cubebs, Mace, Cardamoms, Nutmegs, Ginger, of each one dragme; Juyce of Selendine half a pound, Spirit of Wine one pound, white-VVine three pound: infuse them twenty four hours, and draw off two pound with an Alembeck: the dose is three spoonfulls. A Water against the Pthysick. Take of Pine Kernels, the Pulpe of a Capon, of each four ounces; Plantain half a pound; St Johns-wort, Betony, Violets, Sage, Dittany, the greater Comfrey, of each three ounces; Cina∣mon, Nutmegs, of each three dragmes; Liverwort, Lungwort, of each 1 ounce;
Asses milk, as much as will suffice: make thereof an infusion, afterwards let it be distilled; and the dose thereof is two ounces. Another for the same. Take a Capon the Guts Aq. Caponis Coll. Physic. London. being pulled out, cut in small pieces, the fat being taken away, boyled in a sufficient quan∣tity of Spring-water, in a close Vessel; take of this broth 3 pound, Borage and Violet-water, of each one pound and a half, white Wine one pound, red Rose-Leaves two dragmes and an half; the Flowers of Borage, Violets, and Bug∣loss, of each one dragme; pieces of Bread hot out of the oven half a pound, Cinamon bruised half an ounce: still it in a glasse Still according to art: the dose of this Water is three ounces mornings and night. A Water to corroburate the Ventricle. Take Mace, Cloves, Galanga, sweet Cane, Mint, Worm-wood, Maiden-hair, Rhabarbe; Ginger condited:
Mastick, of each six dragmes; Hot wa∣ter, Mint-water, Maligo Wine, of each one pinte: Let the ingredients be in∣fused in the liquors, and afterwards di∣still them: the dose is one ounce, when the Stomack is faint. A Water for the Asthma. Take of the Decoction of French Barly five pins, Liquorish bruised, Rai∣sins of the Sun stoned, of each six ounc. Figgs 30 blanched Almonds five ounces, Orris root two ounces and an half, Dates 12. Maiden-hair, Hyssop, Hore-hound, Peny-royal, of each one handful; the roots of Enulacampane, Foxes Lungs, of each two ounces; Gum hraganth, Fenugreek, of each one ounce; the Flowers of Bugloss, Borage, of each two Pugills; the Seeds of An∣nis, Fennel, and Caraway, of each half an ounce; Hony of Roses 12 ounces, the four greater Cool Seeds, of each half an ounce; Saffron two dragmes: Let all these be sliced, pulverized, and infu∣sed, and diilled according art upon a gentle firo who dose thereof is two ounces every third hour.
A noble and most excellent Water, to cor∣roborate a cold Stomach. Take of Aqua vitae three pintes, long and black Pepper, of each two ounces; both the Cardamoms, of each half an ounce; Ginger one ounce, Cinamon, Mace, Nutmeg, of each one ounce and half; Aniseed three ounces, Galanga, sweet Cane, Cloves, of each half an ounce: let them be reduced into a powder, and infused for a whole night, and in the next morning add Claret-Wine seven pints, and so distil it ac∣cording to art: the dose hereof is two ounces in a morning fasting. A Water to bring down the Tearms. Take of the Waters of Peni-royal, and Mugwort, of each four pints, Hys∣sop, Hore-hound, Marjoran, Betony, Thime, Balm, of each one handful; the Leaves of Bayes, and Ash, of each one Pugil; Saffron one dragme, Cassia-wood two dragmes, Myrrhe one ounce, Gen∣ian one dragme, Madder-roots three ounces, Orris half an ounce, Savine one
ounce, the Seeds of Annis and Fennel, of each three dragms; Castoreum half an ounce: let them be infused in the aforesaid liquor, and distilled according to art: the dose is three ounces with a little Sugar. Doctor Sadlers Treacle, or Epidemical Antidote. Take of Carret-seed two scruples; the Seeds of Annis, Fennel, Madder, Galbanum, Staechados, all the three Sanders, Storax, Camphire, of each two dragmes; Parsly-seed, red Roses, Peni-royal, Rue, Borage Flowers, of each one dragm, astoreum two scrup. Opium two dragms, Hore-hound one dragme and half, Bdellium, Opoponax, Aloes, Cloves, Mace, Galanga, Ma∣stick, Bole-Armoniack, Tormentil, An∣gelico, Ginger, Setwel, of each two dragms; Troches of Vipers half an ounc. Sagapenum one dragm, Cardamoms, Rosemary, Spikenard, Scordium, Worm∣wood; the lesser Centory, Mint, Hys∣sop, of each half a dragme; Gentian, Bay-berryes, Myrrhe, Birth-wort, Cina∣mon, sweet Cane, Olibanum, Saffron,
of each half an ounce; Acasia one ounc. Aloes, Agarick, Orris, of each one dragme; Dittany two dragms and half; the three Peppers, of each half a scrup. the Seeds of Piony with the Roots, of each one scruple; Venice-Turpentine three ounces, Liquorish one ounce, Rhabarbe six dragmes, Agarick three dragms, Cassia newly extracted 3 ounc. clarified Honey four pound and half, Rhenish-Wine one pinte and half: dissolve the Gums in the Wine, and the rest finely pulverized, mingle them all together in an earthen Vessel, fermen∣ting it upon hot Embers, the Vessel be∣ing close covered. Half a dragme of this taken in two ounces of the Decoction of Betony or Rosemary, after the first sleep, doth in∣fallibly allay the vehement pains of the Head. One dragme of it taken in Mugwort-water, doth bring down the Tearms. It helpeth such as are troubled with Epileptick fits, by taking one dragme of it, in Pyony water. It resists poyson, and obstructs it's maligne influence from invading the Vitals. If one dragme of it be taken in
a draught of Carduus water. It is good against the Collick-passi∣ons: if one dragme of it be dissolved in white-Wine, where Camomile was boyled, it cureth the Dropsy, if the droptical do take two scruples and a half in Aqua Ebuli. It is also good against all the affecti∣ons of the Lungs, if two scruples be taken for a dose, either in Maiden-hair water, or broth, upon an empty Sto∣mach. Boli; or, Bolusses. A Bolus against the corruption of the Lungs. TAke of the species of London Dispensat. Hiera picra two scruples, Flower of Brimstone one scruple, Turpentine washed six dragmes: mingle them upon a stone, and make it into a Bolus.
A Bolus for the Collick. Take of the Electuary of Bay-ber∣ryes one dragme, Oil of Amber six drops, Oil of Aniseed eight drops, Oil of Vitriol half a scruple: mingle them, and make it into a Bolus: take it in a Wafer, moistned in a little water, upon an empty Stomach. A Bolus for the Gout. Take of white Julep called Mecho∣achan one dragme, Diacarthemus two dragmes, with the Syrup of Stoechados; make it into a Bolus. Another for the same. Take Pulvis Arthriticus one scruple and a half, Rosin of Julep six grains, powder of Sarsaperilla half a scruple, Oil of Guaiacum four drops; and with the Syrup of the Juyce of Buck∣thorn-berryes, make it into a Bolus: take it fasting in the morning.
A Bolus against the Stone. Take Diacatholicon, Venice-Tur∣pentine, washed in Saxafrage-water, of each half an ounce; the four greater Cool Seeds, Parsly and Fennel, of each one scruple, Winter Cherryes one dragme: let them be well prepared, afterwards mingled, making thereof a Bolus, and divide it into two parts for twice taking in the morning. A Bolus for the Ulcers of the Reins. Take of Cassia newly extracted one ounce, Mixarum two dragmes, white Thorne-Berryes two scruples, the Seeds of Marsh-Mallows half a dragm: add thereunto a little Sugar, and make thereof a Bolus; which is to be taken in a morning, four hours at least before meat. A Bolus for the Ulcers of the Bladder. Take of Cassia extracted one ounce, Oxyacanth three dragmes, the four
greater Cool seeds two dragmes, Sugar as much as will suffice to make it into a Bolus, to be taken fasting. A Bolus to allay the heat of Urine. Take of Turpentine ten times washed in Plantain-water half an ounce, Dia∣catholicon three dragmes, Diarrhodon Abbatis one scruple, Diatrinsanta∣lon half a scruple, Diatrag. Fridg. two dragms, the best Sugar three ounces; make it into a Mass, of which take the quantity of a Nutmeg twice a day. Another for the same. Take of the four greater Cool seeds decorticated, of each one dragme, Confectio Hamech, Cassia extracted, of each two dragmes; Lenitium half an ounce, Turpentine washed six dragmes, Powder of Liquorish and Rhabarbe, of each one scruple, and with the Syrup of water Lillyes, make it into an Ele∣ctuary: of which take the quantity of a Wall-nut, morning fasting, and at four of the clock in the afternoon, every day as long as it lasts.
Cerata; or, Cerates. A Cerate for the inflammation of the Reins. Take Oil of Roses, Mitles, of each two dragmes; Oil of Water Lillies one ounce, red Sanders, and Mirtle-Berryes, of each one dragme; Dragons blood one dragm, the Musilidge of Flea-bone Seed, and Quince-seed, of each two dragmes, Campher half a dragme, Wax one ounce. let the Oil and the Wax be washed a little with the Water of Purslain, Plautain, and Womans Milk; and make thereof a Cerate. An excellent Cerate for a weak Stomach. Take of Galens Stomachical Cerate three ounces, Nutmegs, Cinamon, of each three dragmes; sweet Cane, Gal∣lia Moschata, of each two scruples, Ma∣stick two dragms, Wormwood, Mint,
of each half an ounce, Aromatick VVine three dragmes, Musk one scrup. let those be powdered that are to be beaten, and make it into a Cerate, ac∣cording to art. Another for the same. Take Diapalma two ounces, red Sanders two dragmes, Mastick, Nut∣megs, Cinamon, Cloves, of each one dragme, Emplastrum Caesaris half an ounce; and with Oil of Roses and VVax, as much as will suffice to make it into a Cerate, let it be spead upon a Leather, adding thereupon four drops of Oil of Cinamon: let the Cerate be quilted with Sarsnet, and so applyed to the Stomack. A Cerate against Vomiting and the Im∣becility of the Ventricle. Take of Mastick two dragms and half; Laudanum two dragmes; Cori∣ander Seed prepared, red Coral, Ga∣langa, Cloves, of each two scruples; Spikenard two dragms, Storax one dragm, Oil of VVorm-wood and Spikenard, of each a little; VVax as
much as will suffice, to make it up into a Cerate; which must be applyed to the whole Region of the Stomach. Another Cerate against Vomiting. Take Mastick two dragmes and half, Landanum two dragmes, Storax one dragme, Taccamahac, oyntment of Orange Flowers, of each three dragms, Coral one dragme, red Roses two dragmes, Musk four grains, Oil of Mace one dragme, Oil of VVormwood and Spikenard, of each a little; casting in as much VVax as will body it into a Cerate, and so apply it to the Region of the Ventricle. A Cerate for a faint and weak Stomach. Take of Cardamoms half a dragme, Cloves one dragme, Galanga two scruples, Mastick two dragmes, sweet Cane three dragmes, Nutmegs one dragme, Storax, Landanum, Mastick, of each half an ounce; Aloes one scruple, Aloes-wood one dragme, red Roses two dragmes, Mint, VVormwood, of each two dragmes; Oil of Mastick
and VVormwood, of each two ounces; Turpentine two dragmes, VVax one ounce and half; make hereof a Cerate. An Excellent Cerate for the weakness of the Stomach, Spleen and Matrix. Take red Roses, of all the Sanders, of each one ounce; Cinamon, Cloves, Mace, Nutmegs, Galanga, Spikenard, of each two dragmes; Wormwood, Mint, Marjorane, Balme, of each one dragme; Aloes-wood two scruples, Gallia, Moschata one dragme, Mastick two ounces, Wax four ounces, Oil of Roses one pinte and six ounces: let these be commixed into a Cerate. A Cerate for the Spleen. Take of Amoniacum two dragmes, Bdellium, Opoponax, of each one dragme; the Flowers of Melilot, Camomile, Germander, Maiden-hair, the Bark of the roots of Tama∣riske, and Capers, the Seeds of Plan∣tain, Lin, and Fenugreek, of each two
scruples; Oil of Capers two dragmes, fresh Butter one ounce and half, Wax one ounce, Ship-pitch one ounce: mingle them, and make them into a Cerate. A Cerate against the hard swelling of the Womb. Take Figs 5. boyl them in water till they become a perfect pulpe; of this pulpe take one ounce and half, Goose-Grease one ounce, Ship-pitch, yellow Wax, of each one dragme and half; Oil of Lillyes half an ounce, Diachilon Simplex two ounces: melt them toge∣ther, and make thereof a Cerate, to be applyed to the hard swelling of the Womb. An excellent Cerate against Weakness, In∣flammation, and pain of the Reins. Take of white Wax four ounces, Deer-suet two ounces and half, fresh Buttor one ounce, Oil of Roses two ounces and half, Oil of Water-Lillyes, Oil of sweet Almonds, of each half an
ounce; Oil of Mirtles three dragmes, Venice Turpentine, washed in Plan∣tain-water two dragmes and half; Boars-grease washed in Rose-water six dragmes, white-Wine four ounces, Vinegar of Roses one ounce, Rose-water two ounces: boyl them toge∣ther till a third part of the Wine be consumed, then take it off from the fire, and after it hath stood a little, add these following powders: Mastick two dragmes and a half, white and yellow Sanders two scruples, Amber two dragmes, Pearl one dragme, Diatrag. Fridg. one dragme, Coriander-Seed prepared with Vinegar, two scruples; Spodium one dragme and a half: Incor∣porate them in a hot Morter, and in the end add of the Musilidge of Flea-bane Seed three dragmes, Campher brought into a powder three dragms; one white of an Egg beaten with womans milk: let all those things be agitated in a Morter, till they be perfectly mixed and incorporated into the consistency of a Cerate.
A Cerate for the Tumors of the Paps. Take Oil of Linseed eight ounces, Oil of Roses four ounces, Honey clari∣fied three ounces, white Wax two ounc. Bean flower four ounces, Amoniacum one ounce, Fenugreek half an ounce, Litharge three dragmes, Sage dry half an ounce: let the Gums be dissolved in the Vinegar, and make thereof a Cerate, according to art. A Cerate for a Rupture. Take Litharge of Gold, Lapis Hema∣titis, Dragons-blood, Bole-Armoniack, Galbanum, Frankincense, Costus, Sar∣cocolla, Mastick, Mumy, Amonia∣cum, of each one ounce; Earth-worms, Ship-pitch, clarified Rosin, of each two dragmes; Turpentine three dragmes, the greater and lesser Comfrey, of each six dragmes; red Roses, Myrrhe, Aloes, of each half a dragme; Galls, Balansti∣ans, round Birth-wort, of each one ounce and an half; Misselto of the Oake half an ounce, Mutton-suet one pound,
red VVine and Juyce of the greater Comfrey: boyl the Juyce with the Sheep-suet and Gums, to the consump∣tion of the VVine and Juyce; and when it is consumed, add the VVax and Tur∣pentine, and last of all the powders; and make thereof a Cerate. Clysinata; or, Glysters. A Glyster for a pleurisy. TAke of Mallows, Beets, Violets, Mercury, Barly cleansed, of each one handful; 12 Damask Prunes: boyl them in a sufficient quan∣tity of water, to a pinte, in which dis∣solve Cassia newly extracted, and red Sugar, of each one ounce; Oil of Vio∣lets and Linseed, of each one ounce and half; the yolks of Eggs two, Sail∣nitre two scruples: make thereof a Glyster.
Another for the same. Take of common Glyster Decoction one pinte; In which dissolve Catholi∣con one ounce; Electuary of the Juyce of Roses three dragms; Species Hierae half a dragme; Vomiting VVine two ounces; Oil of Camomile two ounc. red Sugar one ounce: mingle it, and make thereof a Glyster. A Glyster against Choler. Take of Mallows and Borage, of each one handful; the greater Cool seeds one ounce; the Seeds of Marsh-Mal∣lows two dragms; sharp and tart Prunes six; the Flowers of Borage and water Lillyes, of each one Pugill; Damask Roses two Pugils: make thereof a De∣coction to a pinte; In which dissolve Catholicon and Diaprunum Solutinum, of each six dragmes; Oil of Violets and red Sugar, of each two ounces: and make thereof a Glyster.
A Glyster against Flegme. Take of the Leaves of Rue, Peni-royal, Origanum, Calamint, Sage, Hys∣sop, tops of Bays, of each one handful; the Seeds of Fennel, Annis, Caraway, Cummin, rest-Harrow, of each two dragms; the Flowers of Staechados, Rosemary, Sage, Camomile, Melilot, of each one pugil; powder of Colo∣quintida one dragme and half: boyl these in Common water to a pinte; In which dissolve Hiera Picra and Be∣nedictum Laxativum, of each two dragms; Oil of Rue one ounce and half, common Salt one dragme: mingle it, and make thereof a Glyster. A Glyster against Melancholy. Take Polipody of the Oake, the roots of Mallows and Marsh-Mallows, of each two ounces; the Leaves of Pel∣litory, Drop-wort, Fumatory, Beets, Fennel, of each one handful; black Hellebore one dragme: Senna two dragms; Epithimus, Tamariske, Cordi∣all Flowers, of each one Pugil: make
thereof a Decoction; In which dissolve Confection Hamech half an ounce; Pulvis Hali two scruples; Oil of Vio∣lets and Roses, of each one ounce: mingle them, and make them into a Glyster. An Astringent Glyster. Take of the Roots of the greater Comfrey, Plantain, of each half an ounc. green Galls, and Achornes, of each three dragmes; Mirtles two dragmes: boyl them in water, and in twelve ounces of the Colature, dissolve Aca∣cia three dragmes; Starch, sealed Earth, Gum Arabick, of each one dragme: add thereunto Juyce of Plantain two ounc. mix them for a Glyster. A Glyster against the pain in the Head, called Cephalalgia. Take of Mallows, Marsh-Mallows, Violets, Beets, Barly, of each one handful; Damask Prunes 12. the four greater Cool Seeds, of each one dragm: boyl them, and add unto the Colature, Diacatholicon, Manna, of each one
ounce; Lenitive Electuary half an ounce: mingle them up into a Glyster without Oils; for all unctious Sub∣stances do but retard the purgative fa∣culty. A Glyster against Cephalalgia, proceeding from Flegme. Take of Betony, Hyssop, Hore-hound, Sage, Vervain, Bay-leaves, of each one handful; Arabian Staechados, Camomile Flowers, of each two Pugils: boyl them in water to a pinte, and to the Cola∣ture add two ounces of Sugar, Dia∣phaenicon three dragmes; Benedictum Laxativum two dragmes; Hony one ounce and half: mix them together for a Glyster. A Glyster against the Tympany and Chollick. Take of Peny-royal, Calamint, Ca∣momile, tops of Bayes, of each one handful; Bay-berryes, the Seeds of Annis, Fennel, and Caraway, of each six dragmes: boyl them in a sufficient quantity of water, till half be con∣sumed; of this Decoction take twelve
ounces; In which dissolve red Sugar one ounce, Electuary of Bay-berries, Hiera Logadij, Hiera Picra, of each half an ounce; Oil of Rue one ounce and half, Salt-Peter one dragme: mingle them into a Glyster, and to be injected before meals. An Astringent Glyster to the Ulcers of the Intestines. Take of Horse-tail, Plantain, Salo∣mons seal, Shepherds Purse, of each one handful: boyl them in burnt Milk to twelve ounces; and in the Colature dissolve two whites of Eggs: the best Bole one dragme and half; the Juyce of white Poppy one ounce: mingle them all together, and make thereof a Glyster. Let it be given before meals, or three full hours after.
Collyria; or, Collyries, i. e. Waters for the Eyes. A Collyry against Ophthalmia, i. e. an Inflammation in the Eye. TAke Musiledge of Flea-bane Seed, extracted in Rose-water, Gum Thraganth and Arabick, of each two dragmes; the white of an Egg well beaten: mingle them, and make thereof a Collyry; which must be used morning and night. A Collyry corroborating the Eyes against Ophthalmia. Take Tutty prepared two dragmes; Camphor one scruple: let them be finely powdered, and with the Water of Roses and Fennel, make thereof a Collyry, which use morning and night.
A Collyry for watry Eyes, Take washed Ceruss, Sarcocolla, Aca∣cia, Olibanum, of each two dragmes; the Stones of Mirabolans burnt, red Coral, and white, of each one dragme; Pearl half a dragme, the Juyce of Pom∣granates boyled till half be consumed, as much as will suffice; make thereof a Collyry. A Collyry against a cold Rheume in the Eyes. Take of Frankincense, Mastick, Cy∣press-Nuts, Myrrhe, Aloes, of each two dragmes; Tutty prepared, Sarcocolla, of each one dragme and half, Dragons∣blood, white Thorn-berryes, red Roses, of each one ounce: let all these be mingled together, and with Fennel water make them into a Colly∣ry; which drop into the Eyes morning and night.
A Collyry against Inflammations, Ulcers, and Rheumes of the Eyes. Take the whites of Eggs well beaten two ounces; Rose-water and Plantain-water, of each two ounces; Juyce of Apples clarifyed half an ounce: mingle them for a Collyry, which must be often dropped into the Eyes, at the begin∣ning of the Inflammation: and if there be any pain that accompanies it, then add Troches, Albi Rhasis, without Opium, or with Opium; If the pain be sharp, one dragme: strain it, and use it as before; there may be also added a little of Womans milk, to asswage the pain, or the blood of Pigeons fresh and newly let out; or the Decoction of the Seeds of white Poppyes, with a little Saffron to correct it. A Collyry against the Dimness, Watryness, Redness, and Itching of the Eyes. Take of Sugar Candy, Hepaticks, Aloes, of each two dragmes; Lapis Caliminaris prepared five grains; Camphor one scruple; white Wine,
Rose-water, Eye-bright water, Salen∣dine, and Vervine water, of each two dragmes: mingle them, and make them into a Collyry. Another of the same Nature. Take Tutty prepared, powder of Pearl, of each half a dragme; powder of Aloes one scruple: make of these small Pills, which infuse in Rose-water, Fen∣nel or Vervine; and so let it be drop∣ped into the Eyes. A Collyry for the scowring of Ulcers, and the dispersing of the whites in the Eyes. Take Syrup of Roses, Sugar Candy one dragme; Harts-horn, and Goats-horn burnt, and finely powdered, and well washed in Rose-water, of each half a dragme; the water of Salendine and Fennel, of each two ounces: mingle them well together.
A Collyry appeasing pain. Take the water of Violets and Plan∣tain, of each half an ounce; Troch Albi Rasis with Opium, the whites of Eggs, the Juyce of Fenugreek, washed in Rose-water, of each half an ounce: mingle them. A Collyry cleansing the Eyes. Take of Frankincense, Myrrhe, of each one scruple; Tutty prepared, An∣timony washed, of each half a scruple; and with the Juyce of Salendine, dryed in the shade, make thereof a Collyry. A Collyry for such as are pestered with the small Pox. Take of Eye-bright water one pint and half; put it upon the fire, and when it boyles, cast into it Liquorish very well bruised two ounces: remove it from the fire, letting it stand till it's cold: then adding thereunto the whites of three Eggs well beaten, with two ounces of Plantain-water, make there∣of a Collyry.
Another for the same. Substract a thin Musilidge from Quince-seeds, with white Rose-water, hanging therein a small Nodule of Saf∣fron, to give it a tincture, and let it be dropped by degrees into the Eyes. Condita; or, Condites, or Opiates. A cordial Condite. TAke of the Conserve of Rose∣mary Flowers, Bugloss, Borage, Succory, Maiden-hair, of each two dragmes; Citron-Pill condited one dragme and half; species Diamosk Dulcis, Diarrhodon Abatis, the three Sanders, of each half a dragme; Leaves of Gold Nu. 6. and with white Sugar, make it up into a condite, covering it over with Gold: the dose is the quan∣tity of a Nut, when the Stomack is ill.
A Corroborating Condite. Take of the Conserve of Water Lil∣lies, Bugloss, Roses, Citron-pill Con∣dited, of each half an ounce; powder of Gemmes compound; Diambre Dia∣margaritan. Fridg. of each half a scrup. of the Bone in the heart of a Hart, the Seeds of Citrul, and Carduus, Tormen∣till, of each one scruple; the shavings or Filings of an Unicornes Horn seven grains, Bezoar Stone six grains, five Leaves of Gold, with as much white Sugar as will suffice, as will make it up into a Condite. A restorative Condite. Take of the Conserve of the Flowers of Sage, Rosemary, of each half an ounc. Confection of Alkermes half a dragm; Species Aromaticum Rosatum, of the fragments of precious stones, both the Corals, of each half a dragm; Oxgya∣canty a dragme and half; Conserve of the Flowers of Bugloss and Borage, of each one dragme and half; Oil of Ci∣namon three drops: mingle them in a white Marble Morter.
An Antidotive Condite, or preservative against Infection. Take of Mithridate two scruples; Venice Treacle one scruple; Conserve of Wood-sorrel, and Mary-golds, of each one ounce; balm half an ounce; Mirabolans Condited, Citron-pill, and Lemon-pill Condited, of each six dragmes; the powder of Setwell, and Tormentil, of each two scruples; and with the Syrup of Wood-sorel, and white Sugar, make it into a Condite; taking the quantity of a Wall-nut, eve∣ry morning fasting. Decoctiones; or, De∣coctions. A Decoction against a hot burning Feaver. TAke of Succory with the Roots, Sorrel, Endive, of each one handful; the four greater Cool-seeds,
of each one dragme; Grass roots and Sparagrass macerated in Vinegar, of each three dragmes: boyl them in a sufficient quantity of water, till it comes to a pinte: add unto the clear Cola∣ture, white Sugar, and Juyce of Lem∣mons, of each three ounces: or in the end of the Decoction, add sharp Vine∣gar and Hony well scummed, of each three ounces; white Sanders two scrup. mingle them. Another for the same purpose. Take Sorrel, Wood-sorrel, Borage, Violet Leaves, Straw-berry Leaves, and Endive, of each one handful; Harts-horn, and Ivory shavings, of each half an ounce; Scorzonery roots one ounce; well bruised Succory root half an ounc. Citron-seed two scruples: boyl all these in three pints of Barly-water, till a third part be consumed; add there∣unto Juyce of Lemmons two spoon∣fulls: strain it, and to the Colature add Aquae Cordialis Fridg. Saxoniae four ounces: mingle them.
A Decoction against Choler. Take the Roots of Garden Endive, Bugloss, Liquerish, the five opening Roots, of each half an ounce: Maiden-hair, and Violet Flowers, of each one handful; the Seeds of Smallidge, and Fennel, Lavender, Egrimony, of each two dragmes; Mastick one scruple, Raisins stoned four handfuls; Barly cleansed one handful: Tamarinds and Damask prunes, of each one ounce and half: mingle them, and make them into a Decoction. A pectoral Decoction against a Pleurisie. Take Raisins stoned, Liquerish, of each half a dragme; the Seeds of Annis and Fennel, of each two dragms; Figgs Nu. vj. Dates one ounce; Barly clean∣sed two handfuls, Hyssop, Maiden-hair, of each two handfuls; Florentine Or∣ris one ounce: make a Decoction thereof, till half of the Liquor be con∣sumed.
Another for the same. Take Coltsfoot, Maiden-hair, Lung∣wort, Liverwort, Garden Scurvigrass, of each one handful; Raisins stoned four ounces, Liquerish half an ounce, Bears tooth rasped two dragmes, Stone-Horse Dung one ounce, Figgs three ounces: make of these a Decoction in spring water, boyling them till half the water be consumed. A Decoction against Flegme. Take Hyssop, Betony, Hore-hound, Origanum, the Leaves of Bayes, and Rosemary, of each one Pugill, Guai∣acum, (An Indian-wood so called) grosly powdered: Sassafras, Sarsaperilla, of each one ounce, the Seeds of Fennel and Annis, Juniper-berryes, of each two dragmes: the roots of Fennel and Persly, Maiden-hair, of each half an ounce; Orris three dragmer, Hony two ounces nad half: mingle them, and boyl them in water, till half be consumed, and afterwards repose it for your use.
A Decoction against Melancholy. Take of the Flowers of Borage and Bugloss, of each one ounce; Polipody, i. e. Epithimus, Staechados, Maiden-hair, Raisins stoned, the Bark of the roots of Capers, the Bark of Tamarisk, the Bark of Ash, Fumatory, the flowers of Camomile, of each one ounce: boyl these in three pints of water, till half be consumed. A Carminative Decoction. Take of the flowers of Camomile, Staechados, Rue, Melilot, tops of Bayes, of each half a handful; the seeds of Annis, Fennel, Caraway, Bay-berries bruised, the seeds of Dill, Ladies Rose, and Rue, of each three dragmes: boyl all these in four pints of Water till half be consumed, and so preserve it for Glysters. A Decoction for a Cancer. Take of fresh water Crabs Calcined, and beaten into very fine powder two
dragmes, Self-heal, Sanicle, Bugle, Fluellen, of each one handful: boyl them in three pints of water till half be consumed: in the end adding Crabs eyes and claws glosly pulverized, of each two dragmes; white Wine one pinte: then strain it for future or pre∣sent use. A Decoction against the Venereal Dolors. Take the Raspings of Guaiacum four ounces, the Bark of the same one ounc. Infuse them in four pints of Fountain water, according to art: afterwards boyl them till half be consumed; ad∣ding towards the end of the Decocti∣on, Maiden-hair, Succory, Borage, Carduus, of each one handful; Raisins stoned, Liquerish, of each three dragms; Melon-seed two dragmes: boyl them, and after one Ebulution strain it: of this Decoction, take half a pint warm in hemorning, and sweat after it.
A Decoction against Serose or watrish Humors. Take of Lignum Guaiacum two ounc. Sarsaperilla one ounce and half, Sassa∣fras half an ounce: let them be infused in four pints of Fountain water; after∣wards boyled till half be consumed, and let the Colature be kept in a glass, taking every morning seven ounces very warm. Another of the same Nature. Take of Sarsaperilla cut small and cleansed from his Filaments three ounc. Infuse it in Fountain water eight pints, for the space of eighteen hours: then dd thereunto Gum Guaiacum two ounces; boyl them tillhalf be con∣sumed: let the Colature be put into Bottles, and drink thereof eight ounces in the morning, sweating after it.
A Decoction for the French Disease. Take of Guaiacum eight ounces, the Bark of the same, Sarsaperilla, of each four ounces: bruise them very small, and infuse them in a pot close covered, in twelve pints of water; then boyl them till a third part be consumed, ad∣ding thereunto Liquerish three ounc. Raisins stoned two ounces, Harts-horn one ounce, Gum Guaiacum half an ounce: strain it, and let the Colature be preserved in Glass Bottles, drinking of it for ordinary drink. A purging Decoction of the same Nature. Take Sarsaperilla, Lignum Guaiacum, of each three ounces; the Bark of the same two ounces, Polipody, Epithimus, of each one ounce and half: Infuse them, and boyl them in six pints of Fountain water, till half be consumed; and at the end of the Decoction add Alexandrian Senna two ounces; strain it, and let the Colature be preserved in Bottles close stopt, drinking there∣of
half a pint every other morn∣ing. A Decoction opening obstructions. Take of the five Opening Roots, Liquerish, Rose Leaves, the middle Bark of Ash, the Bark of the Root of Capers, of each one ounce; Orris Root, fresh Cinamon, sweet Cane, of each half an ounce; Maiden-hair, Worm∣wood, Hyssop Carduus, Hore-hound, Fennel, Egrimony, of each one hand∣full, the Seeds of Annis, Ladies Rose, and Smallidge, of each two dragmes; Senna picked and cleansed three ounc. dry Soldanella half an ounce, the Seed of dwarfe Elder, Gummeous Turbith six dragmes, Broom Flowers, Tamaris, of each one Pugil: boyl them in water where steel hath been quenched three pints, to which add about the end of the Decoction half a pint of white-Wine: strain it, and with red Sugar as much as will suffice, dulcify it, and it may be made into an Apozeme by adding species Aromaticum Rosatum.
Another Decoction much of the same Nature. Take Grass roots, Succory roots, Bugloss and Asparagrass, of each one ounce; the middle Bark of the roots of Capers and Tamaris, of each three dragmes; the Leaves of Borage and Bugloss, of each two handfuls; Cate∣rach, Maiden-hair, of each one hand∣ful, Polipody two ounces, Raisins stoned one ounce, the Seeds of Annis and Fennel, of each two ounces, the roots of Liquerish six dragms, the three Cor∣dial Flowers, of each one Pugil: first infuse them, and then boyl them in a sufficient quantity of clear water to three pints: strain it, and clarify the Colature; which may be made into an Apozeme, by adding species Diatrion Santalon three dragmes, and Syrup of Borage three ounces. A Decoction against Melancholy. Take Sparagrass roots, Hops, the middle Bark of Elder and Ash, Succory root, of each one ounce; Scabiouse,
Egrimony, Borage, Bugloss, Fumatory, Dropwort, Maiden-hair, of each one handful; sweet Prunes, Nu. vij. Ani∣seed two dragmes, Succory Flowers one Pugil: boyl them all in Whey, a sufficient quantity, till it come to a pint and half. A Decoction gently purging Sordid Humors. Take of Rhabarbe, Senna, of each one dragme and half; Spikenard half a scruple: Infuse them in a sufficient quantity of white-Wine upon hot Em∣bers, strain out four ounces, add to the Colature Diacatholicon three dragms, Confectio Hamech one dragme, Juyce of Roses half a dragme: mingle them for a Decoction. A Decoction gently purging Choler. Take Senna half an ounce, Pulpe of Tamarinds two dragms, the Cordial Flowers, of each one Pugill; sweet Fennel Seed one dragme: boyl them in a sufficient quantity of pectoral De∣coction, adding of the best Rhabarbe
one dragme, Chebulan Mirabalens half a dragme, Ginger, Squinant, of each eight grains; Citron Pill one scruple: strain out three ounces and an half; add thereunto Manna half an ounce, Syrup of Roses with Agarick half an ounce, Oil of Sulphur three drops. Another much of the same vertue, recti∣fying the blood, purging Melancholy, and removing the obstructions of the Spleen. Take Senna one ounce and half, Epithimus half an ounce, Polipody of the Oake half an ounce, Rhabarbe two dragmes, Agarick one dragme and half, sweet Fennel Seed three dragms, Cara∣way two dragmes, the Flowers of Vio∣lets six Pugils, tops of Borage two handfuls, Russetins in Number two Decorticated, Prunes and Currans, of each three ounces: boyl them and infuse them in a sufficient quantity of water; take of the Colature seven ounces, divide it into two parts: in the first dissolve Syr. Magist. add Melanch. one ounce, Juyce of Oranges three dragmes, the compound water of Balm
half a dragme: take it in the morning early: three dayes after, take the second part, to which add Diaphaenicon two dragmes, Syrup of Violets one ounce, Juyce of Oranges one spoonful: mingle them. But indeed these rather ought to be ranked in the Tribe of Potions, then De∣coctions. A Decoction purging Melancholy. Take Dropwort, Borage, of each one handful and half; Raisins stoned, Epithimus, Polipody, Indian Mirabo∣lens one dragme and half, Senna two dragmes: make a Decoction, and to the expression add Cassia one ounce, Confectio Hamech two dragmes, Syrup of Roses one ounce: mingle them and make it into a Haustus, and to be taken in the morning; ordering the Body as the accustomed manner is in all Purga∣tions. A Decoction against the Dropsy. Take Lignum Sanctum one pound and half, China root one ounce, Foun∣tain water sixteen pints, white-Wine
two pints; to which add the roots of Asparagrass, Fennel, Smallidg, Grass, Parsly, Butchers Broom, Madder, and Orris Roots, of each two ounces; the Roots of Asarabacca, the Bark of the Roots of Tormentil, Tamaris and Ca∣pers, of each one ounce; Egrimony, both Succories, Ceterach, or spleen∣wort, and Maiden-hair, of each one handful; Soldanella one handful and half, the seed of Annis, Bishop-weed, of each three dragmes; Melon-seed bruised one ounce, 20 Raisins stoned, Choice Cinamon three dragmes, red Cicers two Pugills: make a Decoction of these, ill one part thereof be con∣sumed; then strain it, and to the Co∣lature add yellow Sanders, Cinamon and Orris root, of each one ounce: fiat Decoctio. A Decoction against Droptical Humors. Take Lignum Guaiacum half a pound, the Leaves of Borage, Bugloss, Camo∣mile, Hyssop, Sage, Parsly, of each one handful and half, Egrimony two hand∣fuls, the Roots of Fennel, and Parsly,
the Pith from within being taken a∣way, of each two; Orris root two ounc. Liquerish four ounces, Polipody of the Oake three ounces, sweet Fennel seed four ounces, Bay-berryes two ounces, Cinamon, Nutmeg, Ginger, Mace, of each two dragmes: let the roots, the species, and the seeds be bruised, and put into an earthen Pipkin, with thir∣teen pints of Water, and four pints of white Wine; covering it close, putting it into a Kettle with water, that it may stand in a Bath, with a good fire under it, for the space of twenty four hours: afterwards make an Expression, and take of the Colature, Mornings, Noons, and Nights. A Decoction provoking Urine. Take of the Bark or rind of the Roots of Fennel, Parsly, Butcher∣broom, of each two ounces; Ciperus half an ounce, the Seeds of Bishop-weed, Coriander, Parsly, Mastick, Car∣ret, Annis, Cardamoms, Cummin, of each one dragme: boyl them, and add unto the Colature as much Sugar as will suffice to sweeten it.
A Decoction against the Inflammation and Opilation of the Liver. Take of Borage, Bugloss, Violets, Egrimony, Endive, Succory, Fumatory, of each one handful; the roots of Par∣sly and Fennel, of each one ounce; Rai∣sins stoned four ounces, Dates one ounce, Mace three dragmes, Cinamon half an ounce, Aniseed two dragmes, Fountain-Water, and white-Wine, of each three pints; Sugar one pound, Liquerish one ounce: mingle them, and boyl them, till half be consumed: then strain it; and of the Colature after it is setled, take before meals three ounces, for ten days together. A Decoction against such Diseases as pro∣ceed from humidity. Take Lignum Guaiacum six ounces, the Bark of the same two ounces, Sarsape∣rilla two ounces and half, Chiny Root one ounce, sowre Dock-root one ounce, Rhabarbe one dragme, Turbith half an ounce, Agarick half an ounce, Poly∣pody, Liquerish, of each four ounces:
the Pith of the Seeds of Meadow-Saf∣fron half an ounce, the Bark of Capers-root one ounce, the five opening roots, of each half an ounce; Sage three hand∣fuls, Romane Wormwood one handful and an half, Anniseed two ounces, Hony one pound, Cinamon six ounces, white-Wine four pints, Fountain-water sixteen pints: Infuse them a whole night, and boyl them for a good space: afterwards strain them, and let the Colature be preserved in a vessel close∣ly covered: and take thereof every morning four ounces fasting, and be∣fore Dinner and Supper three ounces: and after that the Decoction is spent, boyl the ingredients over again, with the same quantity of Water as before; adding Wine two pints, and Hony of Roses two pound; of which take the same quantity as before: only this lat∣ter Decoction must be drunk for thirty dayes together; And every day for ten of the first, to sweat one hour: and if the Body be costive, in the taking of the aforesaid Decoction; then use this fol∣lowing mixture. Take of the afore∣said Decoction three ounces, Manna one ounce, Syrup of Roses one ounce,
Confectio Hamek two dragmes: min∣gle them into a Hastus. Electuaria; or, Electua∣ries. An Electuary against the Epilepsy. TAke fresh Pellitory half a pound; scummed Hony three pound, Ginger one ounce; Cloves, Nutmegs, Cubebs, of each five dragmes: mingle them, and make them into an Electuary. Another for the same. Take of the powder of Pyony-root two ounces, of the powder of a Mans Skull two dragmes, Elkes Claw one dragme; the Bird Jay dryed and burnt one ounce and half, Nutmeg and Mace, of each two scruples; Agarick six drag. Ginger four scruples: Let all these be finely powdered, and mixed with four ounces of white Sugar; dissolved in
Aquae Langii: make it up into an Ele∣ctuary, adding thereunto four or five drops of Spirit of Amber: take of this every morning the quantity of a Nut∣meg. An Electuary for the Epilepsy, and Suffo∣cation of the Matrix. Take of the foecula of Briony-Root half a pound, Hony, Raisons stoned, of each three pound; baked Squils, Pine-Kernels bruised, of each one ounce and half; Nutmeg, Cinamon, Mace, Gin∣ger, Cardamomes, of each two dragms; Cloves, Long Pepper, Staechados, of each one dragme and half; the Seeds of Rest-harrow, Salgem, Gallia Moschata; of each one dragme; Spicknard half a dragme, Agarick three dragmes: let it be given after six times taking, from two dragmes to three. Another of the same Nature. Take of Pellitory, Rest-Harrow, Stae∣chados, of each ten dragmes; Agarick five dragmes, Cardamoms, round Birth-wort, Liquerish, the Seeds of Balsamit,
Piony, of each two dragmes; the Juyce of Squils and Hony, of each equal parts: Let them all be cocted to the Consistency of an Electuary. An Electuary for the Reins and the Bladder. Take Diaphaenicum two dragmes, Juyce of Roses one dragme and half, Cassia half a drachm, Rhabarb half a dragme, Venice-Turpentine washed in Rose-water, Conserve of Violets, of each three dragms; Treacle one dragme and half, Diamargarit Frig. Diarrhodon Abbatis, Diambres, Diatrion Piperion; of each one scruple; of all the Saunders half a dragme, Citron-pill one dragme, Sugar as much as will suffice to make it into an Electuary. An Electuary purging the Bladder, and allaying the heat of Urine. Take Turpentine well washed in the Water of Marsh-Mallows, Cassia newly extracted, of each one ounce and half; Pulp of Tamarinds six dragms, Troches Gordonii, Melon-seed Excorticated, of each three dragmes, Cucumber and
Pepon-Seeds, of each two dragmes; Rhabarbe thin cut, and macerated in Plaintain water two dragmes: beat them together into an Electuary, with Syrup of Water Lillyes, as much as will suffice: of which take three quarters of an ounce every morning. An Electuary cleansing the Reins, corrup∣ted with a Gonorrhea. Take Diacatholicon Lenitivum, of each one ounce; Confection Hamech six dragm. Species Diatraganth, Frig. three dragmes, Rhabarbe finely pow∣dered one dragme, Liquorish, Aniseed, of each one scruple; washed Turpen∣tine one ounce and half, Cassia three dragmes: and with Syrup of Marsh-Mal∣lows make it into an Electuary. The Dose is the quantity of a Nutmeg, twice in a day. An Electuary proper for those who labour under the French Disease. Take of Aloes-wood, Lignum, Guaia∣cum, Sarsaperilla in powder, of each half an ounce; the Seeds of Fennel, Car∣duus,
Citron, of each two dragmes; the Roots of Setwel, Birth-wort, and Gentian Cinamon, of each one dragm. and half, Species Diatrion, Santal-Diar∣rhodon, Abatis, of each one dragme and half; Mithridate half an ounce, Conserve of Succory, and Borage, of each half an ounce; and with half a pound of Syrup of Succory, make it into an Electuary: of this, take the quan∣tity of a Nutmeg twice in a day. An Electuary purging both the Reins and Bladder. Take Cassia newly Extracted from the Cane half an ounce, powder of Rharbarb half a dragme, Agnus Castus seed in powder two scruples, Catho∣licon half an ounce, Venice Turpentine washed in Rose-water one ounce; mingle them: take of this two dragm. wrapt in a wet wafer twice a day. An Electuary against the Stone. Take of the four great Cool seeds, of each half an ounce; the Seeds of Purslain, Endive, white Poppy, of each
one dragme, powder of Marsh-Mallow Root two dragmes, Saxafrage, Grum∣wel-Seed, of each one dragme and half; Winter Cherryes, Senna, of each half an ounce; Sugar dissolved in Saxa∣frage and Parsly Water four ounces: make it into an Electuary; take the quantity of a Nutmeg three times a day. An Electuary against the pains of the Bladder and Reins. Take Venice-Turpentine, Cassia lately drawn, of each one ounce; Juyce of Li∣querish, Marsh-mallow-seed, of each two dragms; Plantain-seed half a drag. Winter Cherryes one dragme and an half, the Seeds of Melon, Cucumber and Gourd, of each one dragme; and with a sufficient quantity of Syrup of Marsh-mallows, make it up into an Electuary, of which take the quantity of a Chesnut three times a day, first Morning, Noon and Night.
An Electuary against the hard Labour of a woman in Travel. Take Myrrhe, Castor, Storax, of each one scruple; Savine one scruple and half: Cynamon, Cassia-lignea, of each one drachm: Amber three drachms. Let these be finely powdered, and mixed with a sufficient quantity of Su∣gar dissolved in Savine-water, to make it up into an Electuary. The Dose is a drachm or a half. A Heart-chearing Electuary. Take of Red-Roses, Aloes-wood, of each half an ounce: Mace, Nutmeg, Gallia-Moschata, Cardamomes both the sorts, of each one drachm: Cyperus two drachms and an half: Cloves, Asara∣bacca, Mastich, Spikenard, of each one drachm and half: Mosch seven grains, Sugar dissolved in Cordial-water, and Syrup of Cynamon, of each equal parts, as much as will suffice to make it up into an Electuary. The Dose is the quantity of a Nutmeg.
An Electuary against a sharp Loosness. Take old Conserve of Roses two ounces, Pulvis Diamarg. frig. one drachm and an half, Bole-armeniack, Red Coral, of each two drachms: Su∣gar dissolved in Cynamon-water, as much as will suffice. Another for the same. Take Rhabarb dryed well by the fire and powdered two drachms, Pome∣granate-pill and flowers, of each one drachm: Mastich and Olibanum, of each one scruple: dryed Turpentine in fine powder three drachms, Conserve of old Red-Roses three ounces; and with syrup of Quinces make it into an Electuary. The Dose is two drachms three or four times a day. An Electuary against the pain of the Cholick. Take of Agarick half an ounce, the roots of Orris and round Birthwort, Hyssop, Mastich, Squinant, Carpobalsa∣mum,
Aniseed, of each half a drachm: Gummeous Turbith finely powdered and sifted, the weight of them all; and with honey as much as will suffice to incorporate it into an Electuary. The Dose is half an ounce. An Electuary against the pain occasioned from the stopping of the small guts, termed by Physicians Iliaco Passio. Take of Cumin-seed, Assa-foetida, Caraway, Birthwort, the flowers of Chamomile, Queens crown, Worm∣wood, Agarick, of each ten drachms: the three Peppers, and Opium, of each one drachm: Saffron, Carpobalsamum, Squinant, Cynamon, of each two drach▪ the roots of Asarabacca, and Gentian, of each one drachm. Let these be pulverized and sifted; and with a sy∣rup made of honey, and the decoction of Squinant, Queens crown, and Cha∣momile, make thereof an Electuary. The Dose whereof is two drachms, or three, or four, according to the consti∣tution and quality of the person taking it; which must be dissolved in the de∣coction of Aniseed.
An Electuary dispelling Winde, and windy vapours. Take Mastich, Aniseed, Ginger, of each one drachm: best Turbith two drachms; and with honey scummed, make it into an Electuary. The Dose of it is two drachms. An Electuary for the Fits of the Cholick and the Stone. Take Turbith, Acorus, of each six drachms: Cumin, Caraway, of each one drachm and half: Agarick, Orris, Birthwort, of each six drachms: Ori∣ganum, Hssyop, of each three drachms: Mastich, Squinant, of each one drachm. Let these be powdered and sifted; and with honey clarified made into an Ele∣ctuary. The Dose hereof is two drachms drunk in a glass of burnt Cla∣ret. An Electuary for such as cannot hold their Water. Take dryed Spodium, Aloes-wood,
the seeds of Purslain, Gum-Arabick, Gum-Thraganth, Barberries, Turbith, Endive-seed, Bole-Armeniack of each four drachms; and with honey of Roses make it into an Electuary. The Dose of it is one drachm every mor∣ning. An Electuary against the Plague. Take of all the Sanders, Lignum-Aloes, Cynamon, Nutmegs, of each one drachm: round Birthwort, the roots of Tormentil, Storax, of each two scruples: the flowers of Rosema∣ry, Bugloss, Borage, Violets, of each half a pugil: Enula-campane, Angelico, of each half a drachm: the fragments of the precious stones, Pearl, Ivory, Co∣ral, Gallia Moschata, of each half a scruple: Camphyr six grains, Conserve of the flowers of Sage, Rosemary, Bo∣rage, of each two ounces; and with the syrup of condited Citron, make it up into an Electuary. The Dose is the quantity of a Chesnut in the morning.
An Electuary to revive the spirits. Take species Diambrae, de Gemmis, Diamosch. dulcis, of each two scruples: Laetificans Galeni one drachm, Confe∣ctio de Hyacinthio one ounce, Confe∣ctio Alkermes three ounces, Amber∣grise four grains, two condited Nut∣megs; and with syrup of Gilliflowers make it up into an Electuary. The Dose is one drachm in a cup of burnt Claret. A Preservative. Take Manus Christi perlat. one ounce, Saphyr, Smaragd, of the bone in the heart of a Hart, Saffron, Amber, shavings of Ivory, of each half a drach. species de Gemmis, Diamarg. calid. Diarrhodon Abbatis, Aromaticum Rosatum, of each one drachm and half: Conserve of Roses, Citron-pill condi∣ted, Conserve of Sorrel, Bugloss, Vio∣lets, of each one ounce: Sugar one ounce and half. Make it into an Ele∣ctuary with syrup of Cynamon.
An Electuary or Antidote against the Plague. Take an Egge, out of which take the white; and put into the place where the white was, one scruple of Saffron; which dry in the Egge so long, till it may be powdered; adding thereunto Tormentil, Setwel, Angelico, Dittany, round Birthwort, of each two drach. Sealed Earth one drachm, Bole-Arme∣niack, Citron-pill, Myrrhe, dry Worm∣wood, dry Rue, Bugloss and Borage-flowers, Pearl, of each half a scruple: Treacle fourteen ounces; which, to∣gether with Carduus-water, make into the consistencie of an Electuary. The Dose is one drachm. An Electuary against the Flix Lienteria. Take Pearl one drachm, Frankin∣cense half a drachm, Mastich one drach. and half, Nutmeg, Mace, of each half a drachm: red Coral, Bole-Armeniack, Lapis Haematitis, of each two drachms. Make thereof a fine powder; after∣wards commix it with syrup of Mint
one ounce. Let it stand in a warm place for three hours; afterwards, adde Conserve of old Roses three ounces, and with syrup of Mint make it into an Electuary, covering it over with leaf-gold. The Dose is about the quantity of a Nutmeg at a time. An Electuary for the Loosness Diarrhaea. Take of the meat or medulla of Quinces condited one ounce, preserv∣ed Citron half an ounce, red Coral, Pomegranate-pill, of each three drach. Acacia one ounce, Diamargarit. frigid. two drachms, Myrcle-seed one drachm: Let them all be powdered, and made into an Electuary with syrup of Quinces. An Electuary for the obstruction of the Liver. Take of the Conserve of the roots of Smallage, Conserve of the flowers of Succory, Maidenhair, of each half an ounce: the species of Diarrhodon Abbatis, Diatrionsantalon, of each two drachms: Troches of Egrimony
one drachm; and with syrupo Byzanti∣no make it up into an Electuary: of which take half an ounce for a Dose. An Electuary for the impotencie of Coiti∣on; or rather, to provoke to Venery. Take of Diasatyrion three ounces, preserved Ginger, the brains of Spar∣rows and Pigeons, Pine-kernels, Pi∣stack-Nuts, Nettle-seed, Pepper, Cyna∣mon, Rocket-seed, of each one drach. and with the syrup of Ginger condi∣ted, make it up into an Electuary; of which eat at pleasure. An Electuary provoking the Tearms. Take Borax two drachms, Cassia-wood two scruples, Saffron three grains, Troches of Myrrhe one drachm, Trife∣rae magnae sine opio two scruples, Juni∣per-berries one drachm, Venice-Trea∣cle two drachms, syrup of Mugwort half an ounce, Sugar as much as will suffice to make it up into an Electuary.
An Electuary to stay the Courses. Take Diarrhodon Abbatis half a drachm, Diacynamomi one scruple, Diacorallii half a scruple, Balanstians one drachm, Bole-Armeniack, two scruples, sealed Earth half a drachm, Conserve of Comfrey, old Roses, of each half an ounce; Sugar as much as will suffice: mingle them, and make it up into an Electuary; of which take half an ounce for a Dose. An Electuary against the Falling-sickness, called Morbum Comitialem. Take Diacori three ounces, species Diamoschi, Aloes-wood, of each half a drachm, Cubebs six grains: Piony-seeds, Missleto, Mans scull prepared, Peacocks dung, of each half an ounce: Conserve of Bugloss one ounce, Sage half an ounce. Mingle them well to∣gether. Of this take the quantity of a N three or four times a day.
An Electuary against the Palsey. Take Lavender-tops dry one ounce, Spike half an ounce. Let them be cut and bruised, and finely beaten, and with half an ounce of Sugar dissolved in Betony-water, adding thereunto Cy∣namon six drachms, Mace two drachms, Cloves one drachm. Mingle them, and make them into an Electuary, with syrup of Stoechados. The Dose is two drachms. Another of the same vertue, to prevent it. Take of Acorus one drachm, Ginger two ounces and an half, Peper, Pelli∣tory, of each one ounce: Castoreum ten drachms, Assafoetida, Opoponax, of each six drachms: honey scummed, twice the weight of all the rest. Make them into an Electuary; The Dose whereof is one drachm every morning. An Electuary for the weakness and dimness of Sight. Take of the seeds of Fennel one
pound and half, Mountain-Withy half a pound, Germander half an ounce, the roots of Selendine five drachms, the seeds of Anise, Smallage, Parsley, of each one ounce and half: Penyroyal, Hyssop, Borage-flowers, Juniper-ber∣ries, Saxifrage, of each one ounce and half; and with honey scummed, let it be made into an Electuary. This very Medicine cured a certain woman who was almost blinde for nine years toge∣ther. The Dose of it is half an ounce in the morning. An Electuary for an Inflammation and pain in the eyes. Take of the waters of Roses, Eye-bright, and Vervain, of each half an ounce: Tutty prepared one drachm, Mother of Pearl finely powdered two drachms, powder of Salendine, Fen∣nel, Roses, Vervain, Aniseed, of each half an ounce. Make them into an E∣lectuary, with a little honey, if need require. The Dose is one drachm.
For a Cough and Hoarseness. Take Diapenid. Diareos, of each one ounce: the pulp of Raisins, and juyce of Liquorice, Hyssop, of each half an ounce: syrup of Horehound as much as will suffice to make it up into an Electuary; of which take the quantity of a Chesnut at a time. Another for the same. Take Lac Sulphuris rightly prepared ten grains, Balsamum Sulphuris two grains, flower of Sulphur half an ounce, Liquorish and Enula-campane, of each three drachms: Conserve of old Ro∣ses, Lohoch Sanum, Lohoch of Foxes lungs, of each one ounce: oyl of sweet Almonds as much as will suffice to make it up into an Electuary, adding thereunto spirit of Sulphur twenty drops; of which take the quantity of a Chesnut every morning and night, drinking a draught of Mace-Ale af∣ter it.
An Electuary for the Dropsie. Take a little quantity of Ginger, Salt of Wormwood one ounce: incorpo∣rate it with a sufficient quantity of the oyl of Salt, to make it up into an Ele∣ctuary; of which take every day six grains. An Electuary for a Catarrhe, or, a Rheum distilling from the brain to the throat and stomack. Take of the oldest Conserve of Ro∣ses one ounce, Olibanum one drachm and half, powder of Liquorish one drachm, Sugar-candy one ounce, syrup of Hyssop as much as will suffice to make it into an Electuary; of which take the quantity of a Nut often in a day. Another of the same vertue. Take of Lohoch sanum, and Con∣serve of Roses, of each half an ounce; Laudanum four grains, juyce of Liquo∣rish three drachms, Philonum Persi∣cum
six grains; and with the syrup of Poppies make it into an Electuary; of which take the quantity of a Nut every night going to bed. An Electuary for all sorts of Coughs. Take Liquorish, Hyssop dry, Orris, Maidenhair, Coltsfoot, of each one ounce; Origanum three drachms, Foxes lungs prepared one ounce and half, Ho∣ney scummed, Sugar, of each six ounces: reduce them into a powder, and make them into an Electuary with two oun∣ces of Aqua vitae; and eat thereof when occasion serves. An Electuary to purge the stomack of gross humours. Take of Maidenhair fresh three oun∣ces, the roots of Orris, Pine-kernels, Liquorish, Carpobalsamum, Horehound, Chamomile-flowers, round Birthwort, of each one ounce and half. Let them be finely beaten and sifted, and with the syrup made of Honey and the de∣coction of Maidenhair, (boiled toge∣ther to a consistency) make it into an
Electuary; of which take three drach. in a draught of the decoction of Hore-hound, Liquorish, and Hyssop. An Electuary for an old Cough. Take of the juyce of Horehound half an ounce, Liquorish one ounce, round Birthwort six drachms, flower of Sulphur two drachms, Sugar-candy half an ounce. Make it into an Electu∣ary with Honey. Another for a continued Cough. Take of Aniseed two drachms, Co∣stus two scruples, Myrrhe one drachm, Galbanum, white Peper, Henbane, Opium, juyce of Liquorish, of each one drachm and half; Saffron half a drach. syrup of Hyssop as much as will suffice to bring it to the consistencie of an E∣lectuary; part of which must be exhi∣bited going into bed. Another of the same nature. Take Diapenidii, Diatraganthi, Su∣gar of Violets, of each half an ounce:
with the syrup of Liquorish make it in∣to an Electuary. The Dose is two drachms. A pectoral Electuary. Take Lohoch of Pine-kernels one ounce, Diatraganth frigid. two drach. Orris root half an ounce, Green-Gin∣ger one ounce, Liquorish and Enula-campane in powder, of each one drachm and half: Sugar-candy in pow∣der two ounces, pulp of Roses three ounces, pulp of Raisins one ounce, tin∣cture of Saffron, Aqua coelestis, of each one scruple; spirit of Vitriol fifteen drops: mix them up according to art, into an Electuary; adding, if need re∣quire, syrup of Jujubees to mollifie it; of which take the quantity of a Nut∣meg, three times a day. An Electuary for the afflictions of the Liver and Brest. Take of the pulp of Raisins stoned four ounces, Saffron one drachm, Ca∣lamus Aromaticus, Bdellium, Squi∣nant, of each one ounce and half;
Cassia-wood one drachm, Cynamon half a drachm, Spikenard three drach. Myrrhe two drachms, Turpentine half an ounce, Honey two ounces, the best Wine as much as will suffice to coct them up into the consistency of an E∣lectuary; of which take the quantity of a Nutmeg, when occasion serves. An Electuary to hinder Abortion. Take Conserve of Roses, Borage and Bugloss, of each half an ounce; Dia∣margarit. frigid. four scruples, Pearl two drachms, the fragments of precious stones one drachm, red Coral two scruples: mingle them into an Electu∣ry; of which eat about a quarter of an ounce when the most danger is. An Electuary for the Hicket. Take of black, white, and long Pe∣per, of each three drachms; Xylo∣balsamum one ounce, Spikenard, Ladies Rose, the seeds of Smallage, Rest-har∣row, Ginger, Lovage, Cassia-wood, Enulacampane, the roots of Asara∣bacca, of each three drachms. Let
them be made with Honey well scum∣med, into an Electuary. The Dose hereof is one drachm, three hours be∣fore meals, rolling and wrapping it in a wafer moistened with Wine. An Electuary to purge the Lungs. Take of Turpentine prepared with the juyce of Lemmons three drachms, Honey of Roses solutive three ounces: mingle them: take of this two drach. or three, twice or thrice a day. An Electuary for ulcerated Lungs. Take of Lohoch sanum one ounce and half, Lohoch of Foxes lungs two ounces, Lac Sulphuris one scruple, Vo∣miting Wine, Oyl of sweet Almonds, of each half an ounce; flower of Brim∣stone five drachms; and with the syrup of Liquorish and Jujubees make it up into a soft Electuary; of which take the quantity of a Chesnut, twice or thrice a day.
An Electuary to purge watry humours. Take Cremor, Tartar, Alexandrian Senna, of each one ounce and half; Manna, red Sugar, of each one ounce; Ginger, Aniseed, Cynamon, Galanga, of each one drachm; syrup of Roses five ounces: make it up into an Electuary. Of this Electuary take half an ounce: dissolve it in three ounces of White-wine, adding thereunto six drachms of the syrup of Buckthorn-barries; which must be taken in the morning, keeping within doors: and so to dimi∣nish or increase the quantity of the E∣lectuary, as it operates upon the body. An Electuary for such as have a cold body. Take preserved Orris, Conserve of Stoechados, and Rosemary, of each three drachms, Andromachus his Trea∣cle, commonly called Venice-Treacle one drachm and an half, Electuarium Aromaticum Rosatum, species Diam∣brae, Cloves, of each half a drachm; and with the syrup of preserved sweet
Cane make it into an Electuary: of which take a little at morning and night. An Electuary for Barrenness: or, A means to cause Conception. Take of preserved Eringo, Citron-pill condited, of each one ounce; green Ginger, Conserve of Rosemary-flow∣ers one ounce and half, the powder of a Bulls peezle, the powder of a Hares womb, Cocks treads, of each half an ounce; species Diagalangal, Diamosch dulc. of each two drachms; Pine-kernels, Hazle-nuts, of each three drachms; Staggs peezle two scruples, Lambs stones burnt four scruples, Sugar a little; and with the syrup of preserved Citron, make it into an Electuary, of which often take about the quantity of a Nutmeg in a cup of Claret.
An Electuary for a Rupture. Take Conserve of old Roses, Com∣frey, Sage-flowers, and Acorus, of each one ounce: Troches of Amber three drachms, Blatta-Byzant, (a fishes shell so called) burnt, and washt in water, Cauda Equina two drachms; and with the syrup of Quinces make it into an Electuary. The Dose of this is one drachm, drinking after it a little Red-wine. An Electuary against a Hectick Fever. Take Conserve of Bugloss, Borage, Violets and Satyrion, of each one ounce; Pine-kernels infused in milk, the four greater cool seeds decortica∣ted, Cotton-seed, of each two drach. Snails prepared with salt and White-wine one ounce, Anise one drachm, Cynamon one scruple; and with the syrup of Succory make it into an Ele∣ctuary. The Dose is two drachms.
An Electuary for the yellow Jaundies. Take of the Conserve of Maiden-hair, and the roots of Smallage, of each one ounce and half; Marigold-flowers one ounce, the powder of the three Sanders two drachms, Diarrhodon Ab∣batis one drachm, the four greater cool seeds small cut, of each two drachms; and with the syrup of Endive make it into the consistence of an Electuary. The Dose is two drachms, drinking af∣ter it one ounce of grass-water. An Electuary against the winde of the Spleen. Take of the Conserve of Spleen∣wort two ounces, Troches of Capers one drachm, Diarrhodon Abbatis, Dia∣galanga, of each one drachm and half; the filings of Steel macerated in Vine∣gar, and finely powdered, three drach. the seeds of Purslain one drachm; and with syrup of Sorrel make it up into an Electuary, taking of it every day the quantity of a Chesnut, drinking after it a little water of Tamaris.
An Electuary for ulcerated Reins. Take of Cassia newly extracted from the Cane four ounces, Tamarindarum, Mixarum, of each one ounce, mucilage of Fleabane-seed six drachms: with syrup of Violets make it into an Ele∣ctuary; of which take a little, and dissolve it in Barly-water, and so drink it. An Electuary for such as piss their beds. Take Spodium torrefied, Lignum-Aloes, Purslain-seed, Gum-Arabick and Thraganth, Barberries, Turbith, the seeds of Endive, Bole-Armeniack, of each four drachms; and with the syrup of Myrtles and Honey, make it up into an Electuary. Another for the same purpose. Take of the bladders of Oxen, Sheep, Hoggs, of each twelve: dry them in an oven till they may be powdered: Harts peezle, the rib of a dead man powdered, of each two drachms; and
with syrup of Quinces make it into an Electuary; of which take half an ounce mornings and nights, drinking after it a glass of Red-wine. An Electuary to procure sleep. Take of Roses, Violets, of each one drachm and half; Opium, Henbane, white Poppie, the bark of the root of Mandrake, the seeds of Endive, Let∣tice, Purslain, Fleabane, Nutmeg, Cy∣namon, Sugar, of each one drachm and half; the three Sanders, burnt Ivory, Thraganth, of each one scruple; Ho∣ny despumed a treble quantity. Min∣gle them, and make them into an Ele∣ctuary; of which take half a drachm at night going to bed, or one scruple, or less, according to the constitution of the person. An Electuary for the vices of the Ventricle, Liver and Spleen. Take Troches of Wormwood, Tro∣ches of Roses, the roots of Gentian, the flowers of the lesser Centory, of each half a drachm; Diarrhodon Ab∣batis,
the roots of Comfrey, Marsh-Mallows, Liquorish, of each four scru∣ples; Pimpinel, Amber, of each one drachm and half; Red Coral, Lemnian earth, Pearl, Bezoar, Crystal, of each one scruple; Mastich two drachms, Steel brought into powder without Vinegar half an ounce: Conserve of Maidenhair one ounce, Extract of Win∣ter-Cherries six drachms, Conserve of the Flowers of Angelico two ounces, shavings of Harts-horn extracted with Wine one ounce, Extract of Saffron ten grains, fine Sugar one pound and half: with the decoction of the roots of Marsh-Mallows, let it be made into an Electuary; adding Rose-water two ounces, spirit of Sulphur one drachm: mingle them. Take of this the quantity of a Nutmeg, when occa∣sion calls for it. A cordial Electuary for all commotions of the minde. Take of the Extract of Saffron two scruples, Diambrae one drachm. Let them be moistened with oyl of Cyna∣mon as much as will suffice: then take
Setwel and Angelico of each half a drachm. Let these be sprinkled and madefied with the Oyl of Aniseed, Venice-Treacle two drachms, Musk eight grains, Philonium Romanum half a drachm: mingle them. Of this take a little upon a knife-point, when occasion calls for it. EMPLASTRA: OR, Emplaisters. A Plaister for the Pleuresie. TAke of the roots of Marsh-Mal∣lows four handfuls, flower of Barley four ounces, Chamo∣mile-flowers one ounce, Melilot-flowers, Violets, of each halfe an ounce; oyl of Chamomile, Almonds, of each two ounces: make thereof a Plaister.
Another for the same nature. Take of the roots of Lilies and Marsh-Mallows, of each two ounces; Mallows, Pellitory, Violets, of each one handful; flowers of Melilot, Chamo∣mile, Elder, of each one pugil; Linseed, Fenugreek, of each one drachm; boyle them, but first let them be bruis∣ed according to Art, and then pour off the Liquor, and in a stone-morter beat the things boyled: to which add, Oyl of Chamomile, sweet Almonds, Capons-grease, of each one ounce; beane-flour, as much as will suffice to body it: apply it over the whole side where the Pleurisie is; but before it be applyed, let the side be anointed with Sperma Ceti, and Oyl of Almonds. A Plaister for the Quinsy. Take of the juice of Briony, hony, of each three ounces; the flower of Lin∣seed, Fenugreek, and Wheat, of each half an ounce; fresh-Butter two ounces, Saffron half a drachm: mingle them, and make thereof a plaister: apply it hot about the Neck.
A Plaister for the stomach. Take oyl of Wormwood, Minte, Red-roses, Mastich, of each halfe an ounce; oyl of Spike, Nutmegs, of each to drachms; the powder of Mace, Nut∣megs, Cloves, of each one scruple; Wax washed in Aqua vitae one ounce: make thereof a plaister; which apply to the stomach, especially if the affection doth proceed from cold humors. A Plaister to corroborate the Ventricle. Take Taccamahac halfe an ounce, Storax one ounce and halfe, oyntment of Orange-flowers two drachms, oyl of Mace one drachm, oyl of Cinamon six dropps, Amber-grease six grains; mingle them, and let them be made into a plaister, and applyed to the Ventricle. Another for the same. Take of Emplastrum stomach. ma∣gisteriale one ounce, Caranna, Mastich, Storax stained, of each to drachms: Balsamum of Peru, one drachm and
halfe, oyl of Cinamon one scruple: spread it upon Leather, and let a Sars∣net overspread the plaister, and so ap∣ply it to the stomach. A Plaister to stop the flux of a Catarrhe. Take Rosine one ounce, Laudanum two drachms, Citron-pill, Lignum-A∣loes, of each two scruples: spicknard one scruple, Cloves half a scruple: the gums must be dissolved in Vinegar; let the plaister be in breadth four fingers, and in length five; which must be applyed upon the Crown of the head, the haire being shaven off. A Plaister to stay Vomiting. Take Wormwood, Minte, of each one handful; a dryed crust of bread, infused in Vinegar, half a pound, Mastick half an ounce, Cloves, Mace, of each two drachms: let those be powdered that are to be beaten, and all commixed to∣gether in a morter with oyl of quinces, into the form of a plaister; which must be applyed to the stomach.
A Plaister for the paine of the Spleen. Take Amoniacum, Bdellium, of each one ounce: dissolve them in Vinegar of Squills, and so boyl them a little: af∣terwards add of the best Agarick pow∣dered, the bark of the roots of Capers one drachm; black Hellebor half a drachm Goats dung two drachms, Wax as much as will suffice to body it into an Emplaister, and so to apply it spread upon Leather to the place affected. A Plaister against Worms. Take of the best Treacle half an ounce; Myrrhe, Aloes, Dittany, Genti∣an, Wormwood, Tormentil, of each half a drachm: make them into a powder, and with a heifers gall and Vinegar brought into a plaister: which apply to the stomach and navel. Another of the same vertue. Take Gentian, Wormwood, Savine, Sow bread, of each one drachm; Aloes, two drachms; Theriaca, Diatesseron, three scruples and an half; juice of
Woorwood, and Vinegar of Squills, as much as will suffice to incorporate the powders, which must be applyed as before. A Plaister for such as piss in their beds. Take Laudanum, Mastich, of each two drachms; Aloes-wood, Cypress-Nuts, Storax, Cinamon, Turpentine, of each one drach. Olibanum half a drach. mingle them, and with the juyce of Mints, incorporate them into a plai∣ster, which apply to the Pecten and Perinaeum. A Plaister to prevent the coming down of the Matrix. Take Mastich, Laudanum, of each three drachms; Galbanum half an ounce, Gum-storax two drachms; make hereof a plaister, which apply to the belly. Another for the same purpose. Take Emplastrum pro Matrice half an ounce, Storax and Galbanum, of each
three drachms; Liquid Storax, one drachm. Melt these together, and spread them upon a peece of Leather, in the middle fixing a little Cotton-wool, wherein wrap four graines of the best Civet, which place just upon the Navel. A Plaister to hinder Abortion. Take Mastich half an ounce, Lauda∣num three drachms, Yellow-wax two drachms, Bistort, Cypress-Nuts, Mirabolans, the juice of Cistus, Aca∣cia, sealed Earth, Red-roses, Bole-Ar∣meniack, of each one drachm and half: mingle them, and make thereof a mass, which may be spread upon a piece of Parchment, and applyed to the Navel. A Plaister to be used when abortion is fear∣ed from a cold cause. Take Mastich five drachms, Clarifi∣ed rosine, ship-pitch, Storax, Yellow-wax, of each one drachm and half; Laudanum three drachms; Mint, Bi∣stort, Frankincense, Gallia Moschata, Galbanum, Myrrhe, Gum-Arabick,
meg, of each one drachm and half; and with Turpentine, make it into a plaist∣er, which must be applyed to the groyne, and reines. A Plaister to Corrode flesh. Take of the Egyptian Unguent two drachms; oyl of Mirtles one ounce; Mirtle-berryes, Olibanum, of each one drachm: Red Wax as much as will suf∣fice to make it into a Plaister, to be ap∣plied where necessity calls for it. A Plaister for the Tooth-ach. Take Spanish Flyes one scruple, Eu∣phorbeum four grains: mix them with about a drachm of Coblers wax, and so spread it upon a little piece of Lea∣ther, and apply it under the ear; which in twelve hours time will raise a bli∣ster: then remove it, and let the humour out, clapping another plaister, made of Melilot, to the place: the like may be done in Cararrhs, applying the same Ve∣siccatory, to the fore part of the head, which will divert the Rheum from de∣scending.
A Plaister against the pain of the Gout. Take juyce of Poppy, Wormwood, House-leeke, of each three drachms; Dialtheae one ounce: Bullocks-dung fresh, one ounce; two yolks of Eggs, Biscat three drachms; Saffron one scruple: the leaves of Violets, Mercury, Purslain, water-lilyes: let these be bea∣ten, and with one ounce of oyl of Roses, made into a plaister, and apply∣ed where the pain is. A discussing Plaister. Take Bdellium, Amoniacum, of each two drachms; Turpentine half an ounce: Hyssop, Rue, Chamomile, bea∣ten and sifted, oyl of Bayes one ounce, of the best Treacle two drachms, Saffron one scruple and half, oyl of Cha∣momile one ounce, Wax as much as will suffice to incorporate it into a plaister. A Plaister to stay the Whites. Take white and red Coral, of each
one drachm and half; Amber one scruple, Roses, Plantain-seed, of each one drachm; the flakes of Iron pre∣pared six drachms, Galbanum half an ounce, Vinegar as much as suffices for the Consistency of a plaister: which ap∣ply to the Belly. Another of the same Nature. Take bread toasted, and well infused in the juyce of Mint and Vinegar one ounce, Mastich, Balanstians, Bole-Ar∣meniack, of each one drachm; mingle them into a plaister. A Plaister for the Dropsy. Take of the roots of Cucumbers, and Dwarf-Elder, of each two ounces; the flour of Barly ten ounces, Goats-dung dry one pound, Vinegar one ounce and half; Orris-root three drachms: make thereof of a plaister, with our Hydroptical Lixinium. Another for the Dropsy. Take Boars-grease one pound, oyl
of Dill, Chamomile, Bayes, of each one ounce: the roots and leaves of Dwarf-Elder, Marsh-Mallows, of each half a pound: Orris four ounces, the juyce of Smallage and Parsly, of each one ounce: the seeds of Smallage and Par∣sly, of each half an ounce: Cloves two drachms; white wine six ounces, Childrens piss four ounces, Turpen∣tine four ounces, wax three ounces: mingle them, and boyl them according to art, till the juyce and the wine be consumed, and then make thereof a plaister. A Plaister for such as are troubled with swoundings. Take of the oyls of Dill and Chamo∣mile, of each one ounce and half: Aloes-wood, Citron-pill, Nutmeg, Cinamon, Galanga, of each one scruple; all the Sanders, red-Roses, of each half a scruple; Gallia Moschata three grains, Wax as much as will suffice to make it into a plaister.
A Plaister for a certain blackness in the Face, proceeding from a blow or contusion. Take of the roots of the greater Comfrey, and the lesser, of each half a pound; the flowers of Chamomile, Me∣lilot, of each two drachms; Saffron half a drachm; Bean-flour four ounces: the flower of Fenugreek one ounce and half; Butter five ounces, Wormwood, Cummin, of each one ounce: after that the roots are boyled, beat them with the rest into the Con∣sistency of a plaister. A Plaister to take away Corns. Take Galbanum, Amoniacum, of each equal parts: dissolve them in Vine∣gar of Squills, boyling them to a just Consistency, adding oyl Vitriol a few drops: then spread it upon Leather, and apply it to the place. A Plaister for the pain of the Head. Take Caranna, Taccamahaca, Ma∣stich,
of each one drachm; dissolve them in a pipkin, adding thereto oyl of Nutmegs one scruple: spread it upon Sarsnet, and apply it to the forehead. EPITHEMATA: OR Epithemes. An Epitheme to corroborate strength. TAke of the water of Balm, Scabious, and Carduus, of each three ounces: White-wine one ounce, Confection of Alkermes, and de Hyacintho, of each four scruples: Troches of Burnt-Ivory, Kermes ber∣ries, Citron-seed, of each one scruple: Diambrae, Diamosch dulc. of each half a drachm: Saffron five grains. Mingle them, and let them be made into an Epithema; with which foment the re∣gion of the heart, warm, twice or thrice in a day.
Another of the same nature. Take of the waters of Roses, Sorrel, Bugloss, of each three ounces: all the Sanders, both the Corals, of each one ounce and half; Camphyr three grains, Diamargarit. frig. one drachm; Saffron one scruple, Vinegar a little, make thereof an Epithema, fomenting the heart therewith morning and night. An Epithema for the affections of the heart. Take of the waters of Borage, Bug∣loss, Roses, of each three ounces: Ma∣ligo wine one ounce, powder of Gems one drachm, the juyce of Citron half an ounce, Troches of Camphor one scruple, Christal one drachm; mingle them, and make thereof an Epithema, which sprinkle upon a piece of Scarlet, and clap warm to the heart, renewing it often. An Epitheme to be used in hot burning Feavers. Take of Barly cleansed half a Pugil, the flowers of Violets two Pugils, the
four greater Coole-seeds two ounces: water-Lillyes one pugil: boyl them in water, strain out three pints: dissolve therein oyl of sweet Almonds and Violets, of each three ounces: let them be stirred together with a wooden Spa∣tula, and make thereof an Epithema, which apply upon the whole Thorax. An Epitheme for the Liver in hot fe∣vers. Take of the waters of Endive and Succory of each three ounces: Worm∣wood water one ounce and half; white wine Vinegar one ounce, the seeds of Sorrel and Purslain of each half an ounce: the powder of all the Sanders of each a drachm mingle them, and make thereof an Epitheme, with which fove∣are the region of the Liver. But the heart must first be corroborated with an Epitheme, lest the putrid vapors be transmitted from the inferi∣our parts to the vitalls. An Epitheme for the Hemorrhoids. Take of the waters of Roses, Sorrel,
Plantain and Bugloss of each three ounces: all the three Sanders, both the Corrals of each one drachm and half; Troches of Camphor one drach. the seeds of Purslain half a drachm; the seeds of Poppy one scruple, Vinegar a little: make of this mixture an Epi∣theme, with which foveate the Hemor∣rhoid veines branching out at the fun∣dament. ERRHINA: OR Errhines. An Errhine for Choler. TAke of the juyce of Roses, En∣dive and Lettice of each one ounce, decoction of Barly and Melon-seed three ounces; mingle them, and dissolve therein syrup of Roses solutive one ounce.
Or thus. Take of the decoction of Barly one pound, Hony of Roses two ounces, juyce of plantain and Nightshade, of each one ounce: Pomgranate-wine one ounce and half: make thereof an Errhine, which is to be squirted up the Nose. An Errhine for flegm. Take Rose-water half a pint, the juyce of Marjoran Clarifyed four ounces, juyce of Betony two ounces, juyce of Rosemary one ounce, Gallia Moschata one scruple: let this be often drawn up at the Nostrills. A stronger for the same purpose. Take of the roots of Sowbread one drachm, Elaterium half a drachm: let them be beaten into fine powder, and macerated in four ounces of white-wine; strain out the Liquor, and let this Liquor by little and little be drawn up into the Nostrils. But it doth not behove every one to meddle with this Medicine, except those whose knowledg can inform them how to order it.
An Errhine for the ulcers of the Nostrills. Take of the tops of Mirtles one handful, two unripe quinces cut into peeces; boyl them with water and wine: if there be an Inflammation, let them be boyled onely in Vinegar, and then make a strong Expression: add to the Colature Hony of Roses four ounces, and make thereof an Errhine. An Errhine for the Yellow Jaundise. Take of the juyce of Roses two ounces, juyce of Betony one ounce, Scammony one drachm, Hony of Roses three ounces: boyl them to a good Consistency, and so put it up into the Nostrills with your finger. Those who labor under any distemper of the eyes, the use of these Errhines are very Noxious to them, and also to such as are troubled with the Vertigo, and Epileptick fits; because they make a Commotion in the brain, and excite the humours which occasion the Fits.
FOMENTATIONES. OR, Fomentations. A Fomentation for the coming down of the Womb. TAke Chamomile, Sage, Balanstians, Galls, the bark of Oak, Knot-grass, and Pine-leaves, of each one handful and half; Medlars one handful: boyl them in Chalibeate water: adde to the Colature Dragons blood, Ble-Armeniack, Troches of Sealed earth, of each one drachm. After that they are well boyled, foment the womb therewith. A fomentation gently inciting to sleep. Take oyl of Roses one drachm; Rose-water, Vinegar, womans Milk, of each half an ounce: Numegs two drachms, Poppy water half an ounce:
mingle them, and foment the front therewith very warm. A fomentation to the gravel in the reines. Take of Marsh-Mallows, with the roots Mallows, Pellitory, Mercury, (the herb) Chamomile-flowers, and Melilor, of each one handful; Linseed, and Fenugreek, of each four ounces: and to the Colature add oyl of Chamomile, and bitter Almonds, of each two ounces: and so with a Spunge foment the region of the reines, as hot as it can be endured. A fomentation against the windy swelling of the womb. Take of Mugwort, Hyssop, Betony, Calamint, Peniroyal, tops of Bayes, Juniper-berries, of each one handful; the seeds of Fennel, Annis and Cum∣min, of each two drachms: boyl them in small wine, and foment the lower part of the belly therewith.
A fomentation for the reduess of the Face. Take Mercury sublimed and finely powdered half a drachm; let it be in∣fused in juyce of Lemmons, five or six hours; bitter Almonds blanched, and beaten to a paste four ounces: water two pints, Camphyr one scruple: mingle them, and make thereof a fomentation, with which foment the Face, with a fine Spunge, morning and night: but be∣ware of the eyes and mouth, lest any of the Liquor enter in there. A fomentation for a Cough. Take Sage, sweet Marjoran, Betony, Balme, Staechados, Chamomile, of each equal parts: boyl them in a sufficient quantity of water, with which whilst it is hot, foment the Thighs and Legs. A fomentation for such as have pustulls or scabbs in their Faces, arising from a venereal cause. Take of the best prepared Praeciie
twelve grains: inject it into six ounces of Plantain water; boyl it till it comes to three: foment the spots with the water. A stronger for the same purpose. Take of Mercury two darchms, Plantain water, and Hony-suckle-water of each four ounces: infuse them for four hours, and with the clear water foment the spots. A fomentation for a Pleurisy. Take of Chamomile three handfuls, Wormwood two handfuls, Bay-leaves one handful, the flowers of Chamomile and Melilot, of each three pugils; Lin∣seed and Fenugreek, of each half an ounce: boyl these in a sufficient quan∣tity of water, till it comes to four pints: strain it, and put the Colature in Ox-bladders, applying it as hot as can be endured to the side laboring under the Pleurisy.
Another for a Pleurisy. Take the roots of Marsh-Mallows and Lillyes, of each two ounces; Lin∣seed and Fenugreek, of each three ounces: Chamomile, Dill, and Bayes, of each one handful; the flowers of Me∣lilot and Elder, of each one pugil. Boyl them in a sufficient quantity of water, and with a Spunge whilst it is hot fo∣ment the side, afterwards clapping to this Cataplasm. Capons-grease, oyl of Almonds, and ol. Irrinum, of each e∣qual parts; Bay-berries three ounces finely powdered: make thereof a Ca∣taplasm, applying it as warm as it can be suffered. A fomentation for the Scurvy. Take of Wormwood three handfulls, S. Johns-wort, Germander, Ground∣pine, Chamomile, of each two hand∣fulls: Scurvy-grass, Brooklime, water-Cresses, Elder, of each four handfulls; Sage two handfulls, horse reddish root four ounces; boyl them in a suffiint quantity of water for a fomentation,
with which foment the parts for the space of two hours twice a day: and after that the fomentation hath been used, let the parts be anointed with an Unguent for the same purpose, descri∣bed in its proper place. GARGARISMATA: OR, Gargarismes. A Gargarisme mitigating pain. TTake Mouse-eare, Chamomile, Melilot, Dill, of each half a handful; red-Roses one pugil, Raisins stoned one ounce: six sound figs: boyl them in wine and water, of each e∣qual parts, till it comes to two pints: add thereunto of the musilidge of Lin∣seed and Fenugreek of each three ounces: make thereof a Gargarism, and with a syringe squirt it into the mouth.
A Gargarism to be used in a hot Catarrhe. Take of the roots of Cinqfoil two ounces: Cypress-roots, Cypress-Nuts, Knotgrass, Pomegranate-pill, of each half an ounce; boyl them in water and Vinegar, and make thereof a Garga∣rism, by adding two drachms of syrup of Poppy. A Gargarism in a cold Catarrhe. Take of Ginger, Pellitory of Spain, long-Peper, Cloves, of each one drach. boyl them in a sufficient quantity of water, till half of it be consumed: strain the rest, and use it as before. A Gargarism against a Quinsy. Take of the waters of Lettice, Night∣shade, Plantain, Roses, of each four ounces; Vinegar of Roses half an ounce: Album Graecum one drachm; syrup of Mulberries four ounces: Rhenish-wine four ounces: mingle them, and use it with a Syringe.
A Gargarisme for a Quinsy in its greatest vigour. Take species Diahirundinis, syrup of Mulberies, hony of Roses, of each one ounce and half: Sugar two ounces, Saf∣fron one scruple, juyce of Lemmons half an ounce, Succory water half a pint, Plantain water two ounces: mingle them, and with a Syringe often wash the mouth, leaning backwards, Ejecting out what the Syringe puts in. Or thus. Take Raysons, Barly, Roses, of each half a handful; Liquorish one ounce, Marsh-Mallows roots three ounces; Jujubees ten, figs five, the neasts of Swallows half a pound: boyl these in the water of Roses, Plantain, and En∣dive; in the Colature dissolve Diahi∣rundinis one ounce, hony of Roses three ounces, syrup of the fine opening roots one ounce and half; mingle them, and make thereof a Gargarism.
A Gargarism to be used by such as labour under the small Pox. Take Jews-eares two drachms, Lentiscks decorticated half an ounce, Liquorish six drachms, harts-horn three drachms, the inward bark of Elm two drachms, red-Roses two pugills: boyl them in fountain water, as much as will suffice to make when it is strain∣ed one pinte; to which add syrup of Mulberries two ounces: make thereof a Gargarism. Another for the same purpose. Take Lentiscks decorticated (which is a kind of vetch) one ounce; Barly, Gumlacc. Thraganth, of each one drachm; four sound figs, eight Juju∣bees, Raysons half an ounce: boyl them in equal parts of Carduus water, and Scordium, to a pinte and half: add thereunto hony of Roses three ounces: Conquass them together for a Garga∣rism.
Or thus. Take Jews-Ears three dragms, Li∣quorish six dragms, decocted Barley two dragms, Red-Rose-Leaves two pu∣gils, Brier-tops one handful, Honey one ounce: boyl these in Plantain-wa∣ter, and take of the Colature one pound and a halfe: to which add, Sy∣rupe of Mulberries and Quinces, of each one ounce and a half: and so make thereof a Gargarism, with which gar∣gle the mouth often in a day with a Sy∣ringe. A Gargarism to be used by such as la∣bour under a Feaver. Take Briar-tops, Wood-sorrel, Vio∣let-leaves, of each one handful; Jews Ears two dragms: boyl them in Plan∣tain-water a sufficient quantity, till there remains half a pint: to which add Syrup of Mulberries, and Vinegar of Roses, of each one ounce: mingle them.
A Gargarism for the Relaxation of the Palate of the Mouth. Take Balanstians, Galls, of each half a dragm; Gum Thraganth, Fran∣kincense, Mastick, of each one dragm; Honey of Roses two ounces, Mulber∣ries one ounce, Vinegar six dragms, Plantain-water as much as will suffice: make thereof a Gargarism. A Gargarism for the Epilepsie. Take Hyssop, Sage, the flowers of Rosemary, Calamint, Staechados, of each one handful; of the Roots and Seeds of Piony, of each two dragms; Pelli∣tory one ounce: boyl them in Piony-water, and make thereof a Gargarism.
INCESSIONES: OR, Incessions; or a Bath. An Incession against the Stone. TAke Philipendula, Saxafrage, Mallows, Marsh-mallows, Pel∣litory, of each two handfuls; the Roots of Marsh-mallows and white Lillies, of each two ounces; the flowers of Chammomile two pugils; the Seeds of Lin, Fenugreek, and Smal∣lidge, of each as much as suffices: boyl them in a large quantity of Water, till a third part of it be consumed, and so use it. An Incession for the Cholick, and to bring down the Flowers. Take Mugwort, Sage, Betony, Ca∣lamint, Origanum, Peniroyal, Hysop, Chammomile, Melilot, Saint Johns
wort, and Southern-wood, of each half a handful; Bayes, Dittany, Rue, Savine, Marjorane, Birthwort, Asara∣bacca, Ladies Rose, Squinant, Costus, Balm, Rosemary, of each half a hand∣ful; the Seeds of Fennel, Annis, Ca∣raway, and Cummin, of each half an ounce: boyl them in water till a third part be consumed: let the party sit o∣ver the rest, whilst hot, that the fume may ascend up into the body. An Incession against all manner of Flixes by the Fundament. Take of Plantain, Shepherds purse, Cyperus, Purslain, Knotgrass, Sumach, Mint, Mirtle-leaves, Cinkfoil, Night∣shade, Water-Lillies, of each one handful; Balanstians, Mirtle-berries, Juice of Cistus, of each three ounces: boyl them in Water and Red-wine, of each equal parts; and so use the de∣coction. An Incession for the Gout. Take of Betony, Sage, the flowers of Chamomile, Staechados, Origanum,
Peniroyal, Saint Johns wort, German∣der, Rosemary, Bays, Acorus, Marsh-Mallows, Winter-savory, Fenugreek, of each two handfuls; Juniper-ber∣ries, and Bay-berries, of each half an ounce: boyl them in Water till a third part be consumed, use the rest. JULAPIA. OR, Juleps. A Julep for a hot Feaver. TAke of red-Roses dry one ounce, Rose-water scalding hot four pints: add the Flowers to the Water: which let stand together four or five hours, till the Liquor hath re∣ceived out all the Tincture from the Roses: add thereunto Oyl of Vitriol two dragms, which filter, adding white Sugar one pound: mingle them, and make thereof a Julep: of which take
three spoonfuls every two hours. Another Julep for a hot Feaver. Take Lapis Prunella six dragms, Rose-water half a pint, Sugar-candy two ounces: make thereof a Julep; adding Oyl of Cynamon three drops: of this take two spoonfuls every third hour. Another of the same Nature. Take of the second decoction of Barley one pint, the best Sugar four ounces, Vinegar and white-Wine, of each two ounces: boyl them a very little; and in the end, add Rose-water five spoonfuls: of this take a draught at a time, drinking no other drink. Or thus. Take of Rose-water half a pint, Sy∣rupe of Violets, four ounces; Diatrion∣santalon one dragm and a half, Oyl of Vitriol one scruple and a half: mingle them for a Julep: of this take four spoonfuls once in three hours.
Another Julep for a burning Feaver. Take of Sorrel, Woodsorrel, Violets, of each one handful; Harts horn half an ounce, Scorzonery-roots two ounces, the Juice of one Lemmon: boyl these in three pints of Barley-water, till it comes to a quart: strain it; and add to the Colature Aqua Saxoniae four ounces, Citron-water six ounces, Syrupe of Lemmons, and Citron, of each two ounces; Spirit of Vitriol twenty drops: of this drink three ounces once in two hours. A Julep for the Dropsie. Take of the Syrupe of the five open∣ing Roots three ounces, Syrupus E∣buli according to our description, E∣grimony, of each two ounces; Syrupe of Hyssop, and Horehound, of Endive compound, Maiden-hair, Byzantinus, of each one ounce and a half; Juice of Elder two ounces, Juice of Orris six ounces; the water of Dodder, Egri∣mony and Endive, of each one ounce: let them be clarified and aromatized
with Diarrhodon Abatis two scruples; yellow Saunders, Cinamon, of each one dragm; Diamosch dulcis half a scruple: make them into a Julep: the dose thereof is half an ounce. A Julep for spitting of Blood. Take of the Syrupe of Mirtles, Pop∣pies, Purslain, Quinces, of each one ounce and a half; Syrupe of dried Roses two ounces; Bole Armeniack two dragms, Lapis Hematitis one dragm; the water of Purslain, Plan∣tain, and Shepherds-purse, of each two ounces and a half; Barley-water three ounces: let these be clarified and a∣romatized with yellow Saunders, and Cinamon, of each half a dragm; and make thereof a Julep, of which take two spoonfuls every hour. A Julep for such as labour under a Pleurisy. Take syrup of Hore-hound, Maiden-haire, Violets, Liquerish, Jujubees, of each one ounce: Scabious water three ounces; the decoction of Barley,
Maiden-hair and Prunes six ounces, Rose-water two drachms; make there∣of a Julep, adding eight drops of spirit of Sulphur: take a spoonful at a time. Another for the same purpose. Take of the juyce of stone-Horse-dung six ounces, syrup of Poppies, Ju∣jubees of each two ounces; Olibanum two scruples; which dissolv in one ounc. and half of white-wine; Nutmeg in powder one scruple and half: mix them together for a Julep: divide it into two parts, the one drink at night going to bed, the other the night following. Another for the same purpose. Take of the waters of Trifoyl, Scabious, Goats-beard, of each two ounces; juyce of Horse-dung one ounce, syrups of Liquorish, Maiden-haire, and Coltsfoot, of each one ounce; Boars-tooth in powder one scruple: mix them together, taking of this two spoonefulls, or three, every second hour, drinking for ordinary drink a draught of Barly-water, in which boyl some Liquorish.
A pectoral Julep. Take syrup of Horehound, Coltsfoot, Maiden-haire, Liquorish, of each one ounce; the waters of Sage, Carduus, Scabious, Hore-hound, Burnet, of each two ounces: species Diaireos one drachm and half; of the best Treacle one drachm, oyl of Cinamon six drops: mingle them, of which take a spoone∣ful or two, every two hours. A Julep for the Epilepsy. Take of Staechados, Betony (the Conserves of them) and of the flowers of Sage, of each one ounce: syrup of sweet Cane condited, two ounces; the waters of Sage and Betony, of each six ounces: Aromaticum Rosatum one drachm; Conserve of Pyony two drachms; make it into a Julep, of which take three or four spoonfulls before the fits. A Julep for the Hypochondriack Melan∣choly. Take syrupus de pomis Redolentibus
of Fumatory, Epithimus, of each one ounce: of the waters of Bugloss, Bo∣rage, Balm, Scabious of each two ounces; Pearle prepared one drachm; mingle them, and make thereof a Ju∣lep, of which take one ounce at a time. A Cordial Julep. Take syrup of Cloves, Gilliflowers one ounce, Cardiacae half an ounce, Con∣fection of Alkermes half a drachm; Ci∣tron-water two ounces, Rose-water half an ounce, Aqua-Mariae three ounces: mingle them: take of this one spooneful at a time.
LINIMENTA: OR Liniments. A Liniment for such as labour under a Dropsy. TAke of Hogs-grease one pound, oyls of Dill, Chamomile, and Bays, of each four ounces: the roots and leaves of Dwarf-Elder, the roots and leaves of Marsh-Mallows, of each half a pound; Orris three ounces, juyce of Smallidge, and Parsly, of each half an ounce; Cloves two drachms; white-wine six ounces, Childrens urine three ounces; Turpentine, Wax, of each four ounces: mingle them, and boyl them till the wine and the juyce be Consumed; then strain them, and make thereof a Liniment, with which anoint the parts affected.
A Liniment for the Scorbutical and Droptical humors. Take of Garden-Scurvygrass six hand∣fulls, salt Scurvygrass and water-Cres∣ses of each four handfulls, Chamomile and Brooklime of each two handfulls, Lavender and Horseradish-root of each one handful and half: boyl these in Neates-foot-oyl three pound, (but first juyce one half of them, the other boyl) till the juyce be consumed; press out the oyl, and with this oyl anoint the parts daily. A Liniment for the Palsy. Take of Common oyl two pound, Chamomile flowers one handful and half; Sage, Betony, Rosemary, of each one handful, Castoreum half an ounce: Euphorbeum two drachms; Myrrhe, Bdellium, gum of Ivy, of each two drachms; white Poppy, Mustard-seed, of each one drachm; Castor-wine one pound: let those be powdered, that are to be beaten grossely; boyl them with Cinamon, Mastich, Enula-campane
and Acorus, of each one drachm, to the Consumption of the wine: after∣wards let it be strained, and add oyl of Turpentine three drachms; and make thereof a Liniment, with which anoint the parts. A Liniment for the palpitation or panting of the heart. Take oyl of Dill, Mace, of each one ounce: Aloes-wood, Citron-pill, Nut∣meg, Cinamon, Galanga, of each one scruple and half; all the three Sanders, red-Roses, of each half a scruple; Gallia Moschata six graines: Wax a little, to body it into a Liniment. A Liniment to cause sleep. Take Uuguentum Refrigerans, Po∣puleon, juyce of Henbane, Letice, oyl of Roses, Violets, of each half an ounce; Opium one scruple and half, dissolved in wine: make thereof a Liniment, with which anoint the Temples.
A Linament for the pain of the Gout. Take Oyl of Roses half a pound, white-Wax six ounces, Turpentine three ounces, Gum Elemni two ounces, Alume three dragms, fresh-Butter six dragms; Vinegar, white-Wine, the Waters of Roses, Lettice, and Plan∣tain, of each two ounces; Juice of Purslain, Knotgrass, of each one ounce: boyl them together for eight hours, af∣terwards press it out into a clean Ves∣sel: and when it is almost cold, then add Fenugreek one dragm, the three Saunders of each one dragm and a half; Bole-Armeniack, Dragons Blood, of each two dragms; sealed Earth one dragm, Ceruse three dragms, Lithargy of Gold and Silver, of each two dragms; Red Coral three dragms, Musilidge of Marsh-mallow-roots one ounce: let those that are to be beaten, be finely powdered, and all mingled, stirring of them with a Spatula, till it be cold.
A Liniment for the Cramp. Take oyl of Earth-Worms, the Mar∣row of a Bullocks Neck, the Suet of a Ram, Castoreum, Costus, of each half an ounce; oyl of Foxes one ounce; Un∣guentum Pomatum one ounce: Indian Balsame one drachm and half: mingle them, and make thereof a Liniment, with which anoint the place affected. A Liniment to cause stifness of the yard, and to provoke to lust. Take oyl of Lillies one ounce, oyl of Castoreum half an ounce; Euphor∣bium, Pepper, Mustardseed, of each one drachm; Gallia Moschata one scruple: oyl of Mace one drachm; Aromati∣cum Rosatum, half a drachm: mingle them, and make them into a Liniment, with which anoint the lower part of the belly, the yard and the reines. A Liniment to stop the Inordinate flux of the Tearmes Take oyl of Quinces, Mirtles, Ma∣stich,
of each half an ounce; Lapis He∣matis, red Corral, Acacia, the juyce of Cistus of each two drachms; Unguen∣tum Album, half an ounce; Ackornes Balanstians, of each one drachm and half; with a little Wax, make it up into a Liniment, with which anoint the belly down to the thighs and the reins, night and morning. A Liniment for the Tearms that are stopped. Take of Turpentine and Aloes, of each one drachm; Coloquintida two drachms, the seeds of Coloquintida one drachm, the Gall of an Ox half an ounce: mingle them, and make a strong Expression, adding black Sope one ounce: make thereof a Liniment, with which anoint the breast. A Liniment for the affections of the Liver, from an inflammation. Take white and red Saunders of each two drachms; oyl of Wormwood one ounce, flowers of Succory powdered three drachms; Roses, Violets, of each
one drachm; juyce of Succory and Wormwood, of each three drachms; make thereof a Liniment. A Liniment for the paines of the Earos. Take juyce of Rue cocted in the rine of a Pomgranate, oyl of bitter Al∣monds three drachms; oyl of Dill, Castoreum, of each one drachm and half; juyce of Onyons torrefied two drachms and half; Aqua vitae two drachms: mingle them, and make thereof a Liniment. A Liniment for the Wormes. Take Mithridate, powder of Colo∣quintida, Lignum Aloes, the Gall of an Ox, shavings of harts-horn, Myrrhe, of each one drachm; the best Aloes half a drachm, juyce of Rue and Worm∣wood, of each three drachms: oyl of Wormwood one ounce: Wax as much as will suffice to body it into a Lini∣ment.
LACTES: OR, Milkes. Almond-Milk for the Excoriation of the reines and bladder. TAke of the flowers of Violets, Borage, of each half a handful: Liquorish bruised four drachms; the four greater Cool seeds of each one drach▪ winter-Cherries one drachm & half, Mace one scruple: boyl them all in two pints of Barly water, till a third part be consumed; then make a strong Expression, which with four ounces of blanched Almonds, beaten in a stone-Morter, make into Almond-Milke, adding at the end Red-Rose-Water two spoonfulls, white Sugar four ounces: mingle them: of this drink at pleasu.
A Milke to allay the heat of urine. Take of the second decoction of Barly three pints, the four greater Coole-seeds of each two drachms; white Poppy-seeds, and Agnus Castus-seeds of each one drachm; Almonds blanched one ounce: beat the seeds and the Almonds in a stone-Morter; then pour on the Barly water, Con∣quassing of them together with the Pestil, till it acquires the Colour of Milk; which after it is strained, add thereunto syrup of Marsh-Mallows, water-Lillies, of each two ounces; the best oyl of Turpentine twenty drops: mix them together: drink often of this, till the heat be allayed. Almond-Milk for the flix Dysenteria. Take of Smiths water, where his hot Irons are quenched, four pints, the waters of Roses, and Mallows, of each two pints; Cinamon one ounce; Cloves half an ounce, Pomgranate-pill six drachms, quince-seed bruised one ounce, Mastich half an ounce, French
Barly half a handful, Liquorish bruised half an ounce: boyl them till a third part be consumed, adding conserve of quinces one ounce, conserve of old Roses two ounces, Sugar of Violets four ounces: boyl them a little, and with the Almonds beaten in a Morter, make a Milk, of which drink at will. An Amigaalated Milk for a Feaver. Take of fountain-water four pints, the Leaves of Endive, Violets, and Bo∣rage, Bugloss, Straw-berries, Sorrel, and Succory, of each half a handful; Maiden-hair one ounce, damask∣prunes cut number twelve, Raysons stoned two ounces, the rinde of the root of Fennel one one ounce, the root of Asparagrass half an ounce; Fennel-seed half an ounce; Mace, Cinamon, of each half a drachm: first take the roots, herbs, and fruit, and boyl them a little; after∣wards add the Maiden-hair; after that, the Cinamon seeds, and berries of win∣ter cherries, number thirty: mingle them and boyl them till half be con∣sumed: let the Coluture be Clari∣fied and aromatized with Yellow
Saunders two dramchs; then take sweet Almonds blanched, number thirty, Pine-Kernells half an ounce, the four greater Coole-seeds, of each half a drachm: let these be beaten well in a Morter, and with the aforesaid deco∣ction and Rose-water, make Almond-Milk according to art, of which drink a draught every three hours, as long as necessity requires. LIXINIA: OR, Liemade of Ashes. A Lixinium for the Dropsy. Take of the ashes of Broom, Worm∣wood, Juniper-wood, the stalks of beanes, of each one pound; the ashes of the interiour bark of Ash, one pound and half; all which by adding water, make a Lixinium, adding there∣unto some white-wine, of which take four ounces, with two ounces of Sugar,
in the morning fasting, and at four of the Clock in the after-noon. A Lixivium for the Dropsie and Gout. Take of the ashes of the Leg of a Horse burnt one pound; bean-water six ounces, common salt half a pound: mingle them, with which wash the parts affected. LOCH: OR, Eclegme or Lohoc. i. A liquid Confection thick∣er then a syrup, and thin∣ner then an Electuary. A Lohoc against a Cough. TAke Lohoc de pine, Lohoc sanum, of each three drachms; Diatragan∣thum
frigidum one scruple, Penni∣dees one ounce, Treacle one drachm; Orris, Hyssop, Liquorish, the seeds of Mallows, Foxes Lungs, of each one drachm; syrup of Liquorish as much as will suffice to make it into a Lohoc or Eclegm; of which take a little often in a day. A Lohoc for difficulty of breathing. Take of the Lohoc of Fox Lungs, half an ounce: Diatraganth calid two scruples: Diatrion Pierion half a drachm; Orris, Liquorish, Enula-cam∣pane, Anniseed, of each half a drachm; and with half an ounce of syrup of Horehound, and three drachms of sy∣rup of Hyssop, make it up into a Lohoc, of which take a little upon a Licorish∣stick ever and anon. A pectoral Lohoc for gross and thick flegme. Take of the juyce of Squills, Hony scummed, flower of Brimstone, of each equal parts: boyl them to the Consisten∣cy of a Lohoc, of which take half a spoonful five or six times in a day.
A Lohoc for the Cough of Children. Take of flax-seed dried and beaten to powder two ounces, powder of Liccorish two drachms, Mosch three graines, Amber-grease one graine: make it with Hony into the form of a Lohoc, of which let them lick a lit∣tle of it, upon the end of a Liccorish∣stick. A Lohoc for the Exulceration of the Lungs. Take Diatraganth frigid, Diacymi∣ni, of each two scruples; Dianisi, Dia∣reos, of each two drachms; Venice-Turpentine one drachm; syrup of Licco∣rish, Maiden-hair, and Horehound, of each one drachm; powder of Liccorish half an ounce: mingle them, take half an ounce of this three times a day. A Lohoc for the Asthma, which is a disease through the stoppage of the Lungs, causing difficulty of breathing, and wheezing Take of Raysons stoned, bitter Al∣monds
and sweet blanched, of each four ounces: Turpentine one ounce, Penidees three drachms, three figs, Orris-root three drachms, juyce of Li∣quorish half an ounce, Saffron half a drachm, the flour of Linseed half an ounce; and with Asses Milk make it in∣to a Lohoc. A Lohoc for a Pleurisy. Take of Enula-campane, and Colts∣foot of each two ounces, the Leaves of Hyssop, Horehound, Pimpinel, Lungwort, and Maidenhair, of each one handful: Raysons stoned, Figs, Dates, of each half an ounce, the seeds of Lin, and Mallows, of each two drach. Cinamon, Saffron, of each one scruple: boyl them to the just consistency of a Lohoc, by adding thereunto Sugar Penideated half a pound, and Hony as much as will suffice: take of this half an ounce three times a day, A Lohoc for a Catarrhe. Take of juyce of Liccorish half an ounce, the powder of Anniseed, Enula-campane,
Licorish, of each one drachm the balsam of Sulphur ten graines, Lau∣danum three graines, Storax strained one scruple, syrup of Poppies, and Ju∣jubees, of each one ounce and half: dissolve the juyce of Liquorish, the Balsam and Laudanum in one ounce of Aqua Celestis: afterwards incorporate them all together, adding Clarified Hony, as much as will bring it to the Consistency of a Lohoc: the dose is the quantity of a Nutmeg going to bed, and of a small Nut in the morning fast∣ing
MASTICATORIA: OR, Masticatories; or Apophleg∣matisms: i. e. A Medicine chewed in the mouth, drawing humours from the Head. A Masticatory for the Epilepsie. TAke of Pellitory of Spain one ounce, Mastich three drachms, White Wax as much as will suffice to incorporate them into little morsels, like unto the similitude of a Filberd; which must be chewed in the mouth for half an hour, upon an em∣pty stomach. A Masticatory for the Cramp and Palsey. Take of Green-Ginger one ounce
and half, Mustard-seed, Pellitory, of each half an ounce; of all the Peppers one drachm and half; Castoreum, Mastick, of each one one drachm; sweet Cane two drachms: mingle them, and make thereof Pastills for Masticatories. A Masticatory for the pain of the head. Take Marjoran, Sage, Betony, Mace, Nutmeg, Cloves, of each one drachm; Gallia-Moschata half a scruple, Hony, Wax a little: make thereof Troches for Masticatories.
PESSARIA: OR, Pessaries; VVhich is a certain Medicament thrust into the Privities of a woman, with a string tyed to it, to pull it out again. A Pessary to bring down the Tearms gently. TAke the powder of Mugwort, and Dittany, of each half a drachm, Myrrhe, Galbanum, Storax, Agarick, of each two scruples; Savine well bruised and beaten half a drachm; Saffron half a scruple, the best Treacle, Juniper-berries, of each one drachm, and with the juyce of Mercury make it into a Pessary, which let it be involved in a little Sarsnet, and so put up.
A stronger Pessary for the provocation of the Tearmes Take Myrrhe, Aloes, of each one drachm; Saffron half a drachm, Am∣moniacum, the root of Gentian, Tur∣pentine, of each three drachms; juyce of Wormwood, oyl of Spicknard, of each two drachms; mingle them, and make it into a Pessary. A Pessary to stay the inordinate flux of the Tearmes, or to stop them when they continue beyond their course. Take Acacia, Gum-Arabick, Amber, Olibanum, Balanstians, Dragons blood, of each one drachm and half; Galls, juyce of Cistus, of each two drachms; Mirtle-berries powdered one drachm; juyce of Knotgrass one drachm, Frankincense two drachms; and with the juyce of Plantain incorporate them into a Pessary, rolling it in Sarsnet after the form of a finger, and so put it up with a threed tyed to it, to pull it out again.
A Pessary to bring down the child in the womb, whether alive or dead. Take of the root of Sowbread half an ounce, the Leaves thereof one handful, Savine two handfulls: beat them together till they come to a past, add thereunto the Gum Opoponax half an ounce, the juyce of Sowbread as much as will suffice to incorporate them into a just Consistency: of which take as much as will make a roll as thick as ones thumb, thick at the one end, and small at the other; wrap it in Sarsnet, with a threed tied to the end of it, besmearing it with oil of Almonds, that it may pass up into the body with∣out hurting the part; and after it hath layen in twelve hours, draw it out. A Pessary for a flux of blood. Take Knotgrass-root, Comfrey beaten well, of each half an ounce: Mastich, Starch, Frankincense, Linseed burnt, of each one drachm; and so with astringent juyces made into a Pes∣sary, annexing a threed thereunto, to draw it out again.
A Pessary for the suffocation of the Matrix. Take Taccamahac, oyl of Mace, of each half an ounce: Gallia Moschata, one scruple and half, species Aroma∣ticum Rosatum one drachm, Storax strained two drachms; or of Spicknard, Rams suet, as much as will suffice to make it into a Pessary. A Pessary to cause Conception. Take Storax, Spike, Cassia, Nutmeg, the Raspings of harts-horn, of each two drachms; Opobalsamum one drachm, white Wax three drachms; and with the marrow of a hart, make it into a Pessary, which must be used immediately after Copulation. A Pessary for the swelling of the womb. Take Frankincense, Galbanum, Amo∣niacum of each one drachm; goose-grease, the Marrow of Calves Legs, the oyntment of Marsh-Mallows, of each one drachm: let the Gums be dis∣solved in Hony, and then all mixed to∣gether, and so involved as before.
A Pessary for the coming down of the womb. Take of Castoreum, Mastich, of each two drachms; Assafoetida one ounce: Frankincense, Mirtle-seed, of each one drachm; and with Astringent juyces make it up into a Pessary. A Pessary for the Molo, that is, a hard swelling, or a peece of flesh in the womb of a woman. Take Borage, Birthwort, Dittany, Gentian, white Hellebore, Saffron, of each half a drachm; Scammony one scruple, Galbanum two drachms; and with the juyce of Mint, make it into a Pessary, to be ordered as before pre∣scribed.
PILƲLAE: OR, Pills. Pills purging flegm, Choler and Melan∣choly. Take of the Leaves of Sena half a pound, Troches of Coloquintida one ounce and half, Aloes one ounce, A∣garick, Turbith, Rhabarb, of each two ounces: the roots of Black-Hellebore, Devills-Milk, of each one ounce: Dia∣gridium half an ounce; let all these be finely beaten and sifted: then take Ci∣namon one ounce and half: Aniseed, Mastich, Spike, of each a drachm; Red-Roses one handful, species Diambrae, Diarrhodon Abatis, of each half an ounce: macerate them for fourteen days in strong spirit of wine; make a strong Expession, and let the Colature be evaporated in a Bath, till it comes
to the Consistency of Hony, with which incorporate the aforesaid powders in∣to a mass for Pills. Wonderful Pills for the Gout. Take Lignum Sanctum three pounds, Sarsaperilla one pound, Gin∣ger two ounces, Galanga cut and bea∣ten one ounce; infuse them in a suf∣ficent quantity of Aquavitae, and let them stand infused in a hot place, well covered, for four or five days: expess the spirit out, and evaporate it to a just Consistency. The dose hereof is one drachm. Other approved and most excellent Pills for the Gout. Take Sarsaperilla twice washed, and cut very small, and well bruised, one pound: infuse it in ten pints of foun∣tain water for three daies, afterwards boyl it upon a gentle fire, to six ounces: make thereof a strong Cola∣ture: then dissolve of the best Aloes two ounces, and boyl it gently upon a fire, till its humid part is evaporated:
then add the powder of Myrrhe and Saffron, of each two drachms; and so continue boyling of it, till it comes to the Consistency of Hony, and make thereof a mass for Pills; take two scruples of these made into Pills, every morning and night, and so to continue it for twenty days. Purging Pills for a Catarrh. Take Pil. Hierae cum Agarico one scruple and half, Pil. Cochiae, Mastich, of each one scruple, syrup of Betony, as much as suffices to make it into Pills number five, of which take three after the first sleep. Approved Pills for a dry Cough. Take of the seeds of white Poppy, Spickenard, Nutmeg, Olibanum, of each one drachm; Treacle half a drach. Saffron half a scruple: make it into Pills; keep one of them under the tongue go∣ing to sleep.
Others of the same Nature. Take Bole-Armeniack washed in Rosewater one drachm and half, Starch one drachm, Gum-Arabick and Thra∣ganth, of each half a drachm; Liquo∣rice one drachm, Olibanum one scru∣ple, Saffron a scruple, Sugar-Candy and Penidees, of each two drachms and half; and with Syrupe of Violets make them into Pills: one of them conti∣nually keep under the tongue. Other Pills curing a Catarrh. Take of Castoreum, Myrrhe, Storax, Galbanum, Pepper, Nutmeg, Poppy-seed, of each half a scruple; Opium prepared in Spirit of Wine twelve grains: and with Syrupe of Horehound let them be made into Pills, to be used as the former. Pills purging gross Humours. Take of Mace, Galangal, Nutmegs, Agarick trochischized, Mechoacan, of each one drachm; Saffron, Cloves, Gin∣ger,
of each half a drachm; Rhabarb half an ounce, Aloes washed twelve drachms, Mastick one drachm: make thereof a mass with Syrupe of Stoecha∣dos: the dose is two scruples made into Pills, and taken one hour before supper. Pills of the same Nature. Take Aloes, Hierae, Diacoloquintida, Rhabarb, Troches of Agarick, of each two drachms; Scammony prepared, by wrapping it in a brown paper, and holding it over a little Brimstone burnt upon Coals, one scruple and half, Ma∣stick half a drachm; and with the Sy∣rupe of Hops make it into a mass for Pills: the dose is a drachm made into Pills, fasting in the morning. Pills to provoke the Tearms. Take species Hierae Picrae one ounce, Myrrhe, the root of Birthwort, Saf∣fron, Madder-root, Castoreum, of each half a drachm; extract of Mugwort one drachm and half, Steel prepared one drachm; and with the Syrupe of
Calamint, make it into a mass for Pills: Of which Pills, take five every other day, about that time the courses used to flow. Pills to suppress the Tearms. Take Myrrhe, Cinamon, Borax, Cas∣sia-wood, of each half a drachm: Salt of Wormwood two scruples, species Hierae two drachms; and with the juyce of Savine, let it be made into Pills a∣bout thirty: of which take three every other day in the morning, using an hour or two exercise after. Pills against the white Fever, or the green Sickness. Take Steel prepared half an ounce, Rhabarb, Aloes, of each one drachm and half; Hiera Picra two drachms, Gum-Ammoniacum, Bdellium dissol∣ved in Vinegar of Squills, of each one drachm and half; Species Aromaticum Rosatum, Diambrae, Saffron, Salt of Wormwood, of each one scruple; Oyl of Cinamon, Cloves, of each two drops: mingle them, and make there∣of
a mass for Pills. Take half a drachm made into Pills, in the morning, exer∣cising the body; and so in the like man∣ner before supper, for the space of thirty dayes. Pills for the suffocation of the Womb. Take Treacle-Venice half an ounce, Castoreum two drachms, Oyl of Am∣ber one scruple: and with Syrupe of Stoechados make them up into a mass for Pills. Pills to bring down the Secundines. Take Cinamon, Savine, of each one drachm; Cassia-lignes, Castoreum, of each one drachm and half; Dittany, Calamint, Birthwort, and Mugwort, of each half a drachm; Myrrhe one drachm, Saffron one scruple, Oyl of Amber half a scruple; and with the juyce of Mugwort make it into Pills: of which take one drachm every morn∣ing and night.
Pills to procure Maids Tearms. Take Pil. Hierae cum Agarico one drachm and half, Pill of Opoponax three drachms: extract of Rhabarb, Centaury, and Gentian, of each one drachm; Steel prepared, (as shall be de∣clared by and by) four drachms, the roots of Aaron prepared, Tartar vi∣triolated, of each two scruples; the Chymical Oyl of Wormwood one scru∣ple, Oyl of Cinamon and Cloves, of each six drops▪ Syrupe of the five open∣ing roots, to make them up into a mass for Pills; and make of every drachm in that mass, six Pills, which gild: take two of them every morning, and so many also at four of the clock in the afternoon, drinking after them a draught of Wormwood or Steel-wine, exercising the body an hour after. The Method to be observed in the pre∣paring of the afore-men∣tioned Steel. Take of the filings of steel as much as you please, put into a Morter; pour
on as much Oyl of Vitriol, as will dis∣solve it: Let it lye in the Morter till it is dry: when it is dry, it will quickly be powdered, and look of a bluish co∣lour: Let it be cast thorow a fine sieve, and so preserved. Another prescription of Pills for the green Sickness. Take Aloes two drachms, Myrrhe in powder two drachms, the roots of Gentian, round Birthwort, Dittany, and Saffron, of each one drachm; Mad∣der-roots, Mithridate, of each one drachm: and with the syrupe of Mug∣wort, make it up into Pills, adding un∣to the mass Sal Martis half a drachm, (the manner of that Salt-preparation is below prescribed) take five of the Pills for a dose three or four dayes to∣gether, before the new Moon. The preparation of Sal Martis, or Salt of Mars. Take of the purest Oyl of Vitriol half a pound, spirit of Wine the strong∣est, one pound: put them together into
a new Iron frying-pan, which must be covered with a large tile, and so set in a convenient place for fourteen days: the Tearm of time being ended, a Salt will appeare round about the pan; which take clean off, and put into a Glass, reposing it in a place near unto the fire, that it may be preserved for future use. Another for the same purpose. Take of the Salt of Mars two drach. powder of Gum Thraganth one scruple, and with the Musilidge of Gum-Thra∣ganth make it into Pills, of every drachm twelve; of which take three every morning, drinking after them Aqua Lumbricorum, Magist, Sabinae, of each six drachms; Sugar half an ounce, excercising the body an hour after, using this method for twenty days to∣gether. Sudorifick Pills for the Venerean dis∣ease. Take of Sarsaperilla four ounces▪ Guaiacum six ounces, the bark of the
same two ounces, China one ounce harts-horn, Ivory, of each six drachms; Saffron two drachms, Scutcheneel one drachm and half; Egrimony, Sage, Be∣tony, of each one handful; round Birth-wort-root one ounce and half, Carda∣momes, Cloves and Galangal, of each halfa drachm: infuse these in a suffici∣ent quantity of spirit of wine for the space of ten or twelve days; afterwards make a strong Expression, and evaporare the Colature till it comes to a perfect extract, of which extract take half a drachm; add thereunto ten grains of Antimonium, Diaphoreticum, which mix together, and take early in the morning, drinking after it a draught of the decoction before prescribed, for the same disease, and sweat two hours after; continuing in this course for twenty days together. Pills for the Hemorrhoids or Piles. Take the seeds of white Henbane, and white Poppy, of each one drachm; Lapis Haematitis, red Corral, of each half a drachm; sealed earth one drachm, Camphor half a scruple, Mastich two
scruples; and with syrup of Mirtles, make them into Pills, of which take half a drachm for a dose. Pills for the Epilepsy. Take Cinamon, Ginger, Mastich, Nutmegs, Pyony-root, Hermodactyls, Turbith, of each one drachm and half; Indian Salt three drachms; Saffron, Liquorish, of each one scruple and half: Aloes one ounce, juyce of Sage and Betony, of each one ounce and half; juyce of Rosemary four ounces: let them stand in the Sun till they be∣come dry, and so make thereof a mass for Pills. The dose is half a drachm, every day before supper two hours. PIlls for the Epilepsy. Take Aloes washed in Sage-water, half an ounce, Troches of Agarick three drachms; seeds of Piony, the roots of the same, Mastich, Nutmeg, Accorus, Saffron, Salt of Betony, the powder of a dead mans Skull, of each one scruple; Assafoetida half a scruple, Castoreum twelve graines: mingle them, and with
syrup of Staechados; make them into Pills: the dose is four scruples. Pills for the Yellow Jaundise. Take earth-worms prepared with white-wine half a drachm; Diaspolit eight graines; with Oxymel Simplex make it into three Pills, which are to be taken in the morning, and so continu∣ed for the space of six, or nine days. Purging Pills for a Gonorrhea. Take Jalop, Diaturbith cum Rha∣barbero, Mercurius dulcis, of each half a drachm; and with syrup of Roses so∣lutive make it up into twelve Pills: taking four of them at a time, purging for three days together. Or thus. Take Extractum rudii half a drach. oyl of Guaiacum three drops, Mercuri∣us dulcis one scruple: make them into Pills, taking them all at a time, repeat∣ing them over again for three or four days together.
Astringent Pills for a Gonorrhaea. Take of Turpentine washed two ounces, boyl it gently to the Consisten∣cy of hony, to which add the powder of Nutmeg two drachms, of Colopho∣ny one drachm, burnt Lead well wash∣ed in Plantain-water half an ounce: make them up into Pills, of which take three in the morning, noone, and night. Or thus. Take Gum-Arabick, Thraganth, Am∣ber, Mummy, Bole-Armeniack, of each as much as you please: beat them into a fine powder, and with the syrup of Mirtles, make thereof a Mass for Pills: out of every drachm form four pills, taking one of them every meale, and two in the morning. Other Pills for stopping a Gonorrhaea or flux of Sperm. Take Turpentine washed in Plan∣tain-water one ounce: boyl it for half
an hour in the water; afterwards mix with it these powders following, Bole-Armeniack, white-Poppy-seed, Nut∣megs, Lettice-seed, red-Corral, shav∣ings of Ivory, Agnus Castus-seed, of each half a drachm: make thereof Pills. Pills for the worms. Take Agarick, Rhabarb, Gentian, Myrrhe, Dittany, burnt harts-horn, Mint, Coraline, Horehound, Worm∣wood, of each one drachm; Saffron one scruple, Aloes two scruples: with syrup of Rhabarb, make thereof a Mass for Pills: the dose is half, continued for eight days. Pills for the Hypochondriack Melan∣choly. Take of Cretensian Epithimus one ounce, the best Aloes half an ounce, Nutmeg, Cloves, Senna, of each two drachms; Salt of Wormwood half a drachm, Gum-Amonium dissolved in Vinegar of Squills three drachms; the bark of black Hellebore six drachms,
Saffron one scruple: and with the syrup of Epithimus make thereof a Mass for Pills, forming four Pills out of every drachm; adding to every drachm one scruple of Extractum Rudii: take three every other day fasting, or an hour before Supper. Pills for the Dropsy. Take species Hierae simplicis, one drachm; the Salt of sea-colworts, Pills of Laureol, of each one scruple: Elate∣rium four graines; mingle them, and make them into pills; divide them into two parts for two doses. Other Pills for the same purpose. Take Eleterium half a scruple, Pul∣vis Soldanellae, Ginger, Mechoachan of each one scruple, Galangal, Cloves, Cinamon, Saffron, of each half a scruple, and with the juyce of Orris make them into Pills: take three of them for a dose.
Pills for the windyness and hardness of the Spleen. Take of Senna, Troches of Agarick, of each one drachm; Pills of Fuma∣tory, Annis, Mastich▪ of each one scruple: extract of black Hellebore, half a scruple, the bark of the root of Capers one drachm; Saffron half a scruple; and with the syrup of Hops, make them into Pills: the dose is one scruple made into Pills before supper; which must be continued for the space of thirty days. An excellent Pill for the head and stomach, called the Viati∣can Pill. Take the true Amomum, or in the want of it Aniseed, Mastich, Ginger, A∣cours, Cardamoms, Cinamon, Setwel, Mace, Nutmeg, Cloves, Saffron, Cu∣bebs, Aloes-wood, Turbith, Manna, Agarick, Senna, Cassia Lignea, the five Mirobalans, of each one scruple: Rha∣barb one ounce, Aloes two ounces, and six drachms; Carduus, Scordium,
of each half a drachm; and with syrup of Roses make it into a mass; of which take the first day one Pill, the next day two, the next three, and on the fourth day four: they will keep the body so∣luble, resist poyson, defend the stomach from all ill vapors, with many other vertues: it may be used a whole year, by taking one or two of them once in ten days. There is no Pill in the world endued with more eximious qualities then this. Pills for the mother. Take Assafoetida, Castoreum, of each one drachm; Vine-seed four scruples: make thereof powder, and with the sy∣rupe of Staechados, make them into Pills: of these take half a drachm, at night going to bed; and so continue for the space of ten days. Pills for the pain of the head. Take Pil. Macri two scruples, Rosine of Jalop four grains, Pil. Cochiae the lesser ten grains, oyl of Juniper-berries and Nutmegs, of each three drops:
make them into six Pills, to be taken in the morning. Pills for Rheum in the Eyes. Take Extractum Rudii one scruple, Rosine of Jalop four graines, oyl of Guaiacum two drops: make them into Pills, and take them at once. POMA ODORATA: OR, Apples to smell to. An Apple against the Epilepsy. TAke of the roots and seeds of Pyony, of each one drachm and half; the seeds of Roman Gith, macerated in Vinegar one drachm, Castoreum half a drachm, powder of Elkes-Clawes half a drachm, Camphor half a scruple. And if the disease be not per cousensum uteri, let these Aromaticks
be added: Cloves and Cinamon, of each one scruple; Mosch and Amber, of each grains two: and with Gum-Thraganth, dissolved in Rose-water, make it up into the form of an Apple, which must often be smelled to. An Apple for the plague, and the refreshing of Languishing Spirits. Take of the best Laudanum two drachms, Cloves, Mace, Cinamon, Ben∣zoin, Storax, the root of Angelico, Nutmeg, sweet-Cane, Myrrhe, Spike, Amber, Coral, Frankincense, of each half a drachm; Camphor half a scruple, Gum Juniper one scruple, red Roses half a drachm, all the Sanders two scruples, Mace one scruple, oyl of Ci∣namon six drops, oyl of Anniseed four drops, of the best Bole one scruple, Amber half a scruple, Mosch four grains: and with Rose-water and white-Wax, as much as will suffice to make it up into a Pomander, which must be often smelled to. This hath been often confirm∣ed for a wonderful preservative in the time of the Plague at London, 1636.
A Pomander to perfume the body. Take of Storax, Benzoin, Laudanum, of each two drachms, Rhodium-wood one drachm; damask-Roses, half a drachm; Orris one scruple, dust of small-Coal one drachm and half; Musk Cod two drachms, Amber-greace and Civet, of each ten grains; oyl of Rho∣dium and Cinamon of each two drops, and with the Musilidg of Gum-Thra∣ganth extraced in Rose-water, as much as will suffice to make it into a Pomander, of what form you please; which if it be carried in the Pocket, will yeeld a most fragrant scent.
POTIONES: OR, Potions. A Purging Potion against the Hypochon∣driack Melancholy. TAke of syrup of Roses solutive four ounces, Confectio Hamech three drachms, species Aroma∣ticum Rosatum half a drachm; mingle them, and make thereof a Potion. A purging Potion against Choler. Take Rhabarb one drachm: let it be infused in Succory-water three ounces: strain it, adding Cassia drawn newly from the Cane, Diaman of each half an ounce; Electuary of the juyce of Roses two drachms, oyl of Cinamon three drops: make it up into a Potion.
A Potion purging flegm. Take Agarick Trochiscized, one drachm and half; Rhabarb two dragms; Cinamon, Ginger, of each one scruple and half: macerate them in Hyssop-water three ounces, for twelve hours: afterwards let it be pressed out, and strained, adding Diacarthemus, two drachms; syrup of Staechados half an ounce, species Aromaticum Rosatum one scruple: mingle them, and drink it off at a draught. A Potion purging flegm, Choler, and Melancholy. Take of the infusion of Senna three ounces, Diacatholicon half an ounce, Diaphaenicon two drachms, Diaman∣nae one drachm, syrup of Succory one ounce, oyl of Cinamon three drops: mingle them, and make thereof a Po∣tion: let it be taken in the morning, using the acustomed manner of pro∣ceeding, as ordered in all purgations.
Another for the same end and purpose. Take Rhabarb two scruples, Chebu∣lan and Citron, Myrabolens, of each one scruple; Senna three drachms, pulp of Tamarinds one drachm and half, the Cordial flowers, of each one pugil: Squinant ten grains, Ginger six grains, sweet Fennel-seeds half a drachm, Yellow Saunders and Citron-pill, of each half a scruple, Manna six drachms; infuse them for twelve hours in white-wine and Succory-water, of each three ounces: strain it, and add to the Co∣lature Syrupus adversus Melancholi∣um of Roses, with Agarick, of each half an ounce, Tartar Vitriolatum ten grains, spirit of Sulphur two or three drops: mingle it for a Potion; take it early in the morning, not drinking any posset-drink till it hath wrought once. A Potion against the stone and the winde of the Spleen. Take of Senna two ounces, Cloves two scruples: let them be infused in
half a pint of Strawberry-water, to which add the flower of Cassia one ounce, Turpentine washed in Saxafrage water, and dissolved with the Yolk of an Egg, half an ounce: Nutmeg two drachms; species Aromaticum Rosa∣tum one drachm, syrup of Hops, Drop-wort, Marsh-Mallows, of each one ounce; oyl of Cinamon six drops, spirit of Sulphur one scruple: mingle them, and divide it into three parts, for three several Potions. A purging Potion for the Jaundise. Take Rhabarb two drachms, Cina∣mon one scruple, Troches of Agarick half a drachm, Ginger half a scruple: let them be infused in white-wine and Endive-water, as much as will suffice: let there be of the Colature three ounces: add thereunto Manna one ounce and half; mingle them, and make thereof a Potion. Or thus. Take of Rhabarb one drachm and half, Spickenard eight grains, Aga∣rick
one drachm: let them be macerat∣ed in the waters of Endive and Worm∣wood for twelve hours, and to the Co∣lature or Liquor strained out, add Dia∣manna, Electuary of the juyce of Roses, of each two drachms; Salt of Worm∣wood, Diacurcumae, of each half a scruple, Yellow Sanders one scruple: mingle them for a Potion. A Potion for the flix Diarrhaea. Take of the conserve of old Roses, Berberies, of each half an ounce; Smal∣lidge prepared with syrup of wine two grains, Diascordium one drachm, Mithridate one scruple: dissolve them in the waters of Plantaine, Sorrel, and Red-Roses, of each one ounce; syrup of the bark of Citron-pill one ounce: mingle and make them into a Potion, to be taken in the morning fasting. A purging Potion for the flix Dysenteria. Take Torrefied Rhabarb one drach. and half, Yellow Mirabolens Torre∣fied also one drachm, powder of harts-horn half a drachm, Plantain-water
two ounces, syrup of dried Roses one ounce: make it into a Potion. A Potion to bring down the Secundines or after▪birth. Take Aloes-wood, Cassia-wood, Myrrhe, Saffron, Cinamon, Agarick, Savine, Assafoetida, Amber, Castoreum, of each one scruple: Sugar one ounce and half: let them be infused in Aqua∣vitae; afterwards press out the Liquor, and drink one ounce of it for a dose. A Potion to bring down the Tearms. Take juyce of Savine one drachm; Saffron two grains, the compound wa∣ter of Horsradish-root one ounce: Dul∣cifie it with Sugar; let it be repeated for four days together, or more, if need require. A Potion for the Mother. Take Nutmeg bruised three ounces, fountain-water one pint and half: boyl them till half be consumed; and to the Colature add white Sugar four ounces:
boyl them a little together: of this take one ounce every morning, and at four of the Clock in the after∣noon, drinking after it posset-drink, in which let there be boyled tops of Thyme. A Potion causing sleep. Take of the syrup of Poppies, Dia∣codium, of each half an ounce: Lettice-water two ounces, Diamargarit frig. two scruples; mingle them, and drink it off going to bed. A Potion for the Dropsy. Take of the juyce of Orris three drachms; Elaterium six grains: mingle them; drink it off fasting. Another Potion for the Dropsy. Take of Lignum Guaiacum one pound, Egrimonie one handful, Asarabacca half a handful, Maiden-hair, Dodder, Dwarf-Elder, of each one handful and half; the five opening roots, of each half an ounce: Madder-roots, the roots of
Orris and Elder, of each one ounce, Liquorish, sea-colworts, of each three ounces; the seeds of Fennel, Annis, Parsly, Smallidge, Alkanet, of each one drachm; Cinamon three drachms, of the Cordial flowers, of each one pu∣gil: the seeds of Meadow-Saffron one ounce and half. But if it be a Dropsy with a swelling of the Spleen, then add the roots of Capers, Elder, Tamarisk, and the inward bark of Ash, of each half an ounce: boyl them in ten pints of foun∣tain-water, and four pints of white-wine, till full four pints be consumed: add to the Colature syrup of Egrimony half a pound; mingle them. The dose is four ounces, three times a day, at morning, before dinner and supper. A Potion to cause sweat. Take of the best Treacle, one drach. Gum of Guaiacum one drachm & half, Salt of Wormwood one scruple, Bezoar stone three grains, Carduus-water two ounces and half, species Aromaticum Rosatum one scruple and half: mingle them for a Potion.
Another of the same Nature, to drive any thing from the heart. Take of Treacle-water three ounces, Venice-Treacle half a drachm, Al∣kermes two scruples, Gascoin-powder one scruple, syrup of Gilliflowers one ounce: mingle them, drink it off at a draught, afterwards cover the body warm, that it may sweat. A cordial Potion. Take of Damask-Rose-water half an ounce, Citron-water two ounces, Mint-water six drachms, Aqua-Coelestis half an ounce, Aqua-Mariae two drachms, Magister of pearl ten grains, Alker∣mes two scruples; Syrupus Cardiacus, and syrup of Cinamon, of each half an ounce; mingle them for a Potion, di∣viding into two parts for two doses. A Potion of Mechoachan, purging saltish, watrish, and scorbuti∣cal humors. Take of Mechoachan four ounces,
Hermodacts, Guaiacum, of each three ounces: Ginger two drachms; Sarsape∣rilla, Liquorish, of each two-ounces; Nutmeg three drachms, Bindweed one ounce and half: prepare them sing∣ly as their nature requires, and put them in a bag, with one ounce of Sen∣na, including in the bag a flint-stone, to cause it to sink to the bottome; which bag put into a little Rundlet contain∣ing three Gallons of beer new and fresh; which after it hath stood five days, draw out a bowl full to drink morning and night. A Potion clarifying the blood, allaying the heat of the Liver, and purging away all serose humors. Take Senna three ounces, Monks Rhabarb six ounces, Madder-roots, and Dock-roots, of each two ounces; Fig∣word, and Drop-wort, of each one ounce and half; Sarsaperilla three ounces, Guaiacum six drachms, Li∣quorish one ounce, the Leaves of Liver∣wort, Ceterach, Mugwort, Egrimony, Scabious; of each one handul and half: Arch-Angel-flowers one handful, the
seeds of Annis and Fennel, of each one ounce: include them all in a bag, put∣ing a stone therein; which bag hang in a Runlet containing three Gallons of new beer, and after five or six dayes drink a large draught thereof twice a day, in the morning, and at four of the Clok in the afternoon. An excellent Ponado, broth, or water-gruel for a Cough. Take of the roots of Avens, Scabi∣ous, flower de luce, Asarabacca, Poly∣pody, Lovage, Columbine, Tormentil, long-Birthwort, Strawberry, Sorrel, Madder, of each one ounce: slice them thin, that are to be sliced; and then take Staechados, red-Sage, Endive, Ceterach, wood-Sorrel, Maiden-haire, of each one handful; English Liquorish one ounce and half: boyl all these in two Gallons of Conduit-water till three quarts be consumed; let it settle, and pour off the clear, and with it make Ponado, or water-gruel, as you would do with common water: and every mess you eat, let it be sweeten∣ed with Sugar-Candy on the day-time;
and if you eat any of it at night, add these syrups thereunto. Take syrup of Mirtles, Horehound, Hyssop, Betony compound, Scabious compound, Corral, and spirit of Mint, of each one ounce: mingle them to∣gether, and eat thereof. Purging prunes. Take Senna two ounces, Anniseed half an ounce, harts-horn half an ounce, Rhabarb two drachms; boyl them in a pint and half of water: dissolve in the Colature three ounces of Manna; in that Liquor stew one pound and half of prunes, adding four ounces of Rose-water: of those prunes eat four of five every morning with three or four spoonfuls of the syrup.
PƲLERES: OR, Powders, A Powder for the pangs of a woman after Travel. TAke of the greater Comfrey dry one drachm; Peach-Ker∣nells, Nutmegs, of each two drachms; Amber one drachm, Amber∣grece one scruple: make it into a Pow∣der: the dose is a drachm in a draught of white-wine. Or thus. Take the stones of Dates and Peaches, of each one drachm and half; Nutmegs four scruples, Pulvis Diamarg. Calid. Annis condited, of each one drachm and half; Cinamon two scru∣ples, Saffron half a scruple, Sugar to the
weight of them all; make of these a fine powder: take two drachms with white-wine, twice or thrice in a day, if the pains be vehement. A Powder to bring down the Tearms. Take of choise Cinamon half an ounce, the roots of Birthwort, Valeri∣an Hyposelini, of each two drachms; Troches of Myrrhe one drachm, Saffron one scruple, species Diambrae two scru∣ples, Sugar to the weight of them all; make thereof a Powder: the dose is one drachm taken in the decoction of Cicers. A Powder staying the courses. Take of the seeds of white-Poppies, the seed of white-Henbane, shavings of Ivory, harts-horn, Red Roses, sealed earth, Pomgranate-pill, of each half a drachm; Lapis Hematitis, Corral, Ma∣stich, of each one scruple: the dose is half a drachm, taken in broth morning and night, which is very effectual.
A Powder for a Coagulated blood, occa∣sioned by a fall or a bruise. Take of the roots of Madder, and Rhabarb, Sperma Caeti, Mummy, Crabs-Eyes, Amber, of each one drachm; mingle them, and make thereof a Pow∣der: the dose is a drachm in Scabious-water. A Powder for the preservation of sight. Take Betony, Rue, Saxafrage, Salen∣dine, Penniroyal, Anniseed, Eye-bright, of each half a Pugil: Cardamoms, Gin∣ger, Fennel, Origanum, Galangal, of each one drachm; Vervine two dragms: mingle them, and make thereof a Pow∣der, which must often be taken in broth. A Powder against the stone. Take Powder of Venice-Turpen∣tine three drachms, winter-Cherries, Broom-seed, Saxafrage, Parsly, Smal∣lage, the roots of Drop-wort, Galan∣gal, Rest-harrow, Agarick, of each one
drachm; the dose is two scruples, ta∣ken in white-wine fasting. A Powder for the Gonorrhaea. Take Olibanum, Corral, Troches of Camphor, Lapis Hematitis, Agnus-Castus-seed, of each one drachm; Nut∣megs two drachms, cocted Turpentine powdered three drachms, Pearle one scruple: mingle them, and make there∣of a Powder: the dose is one drachm with the white of an Egg in a cup of red-wine. A sneezing Powder. Take Pellitory, Betony, Marjoran, of each one drachm, Castoreum, Mace, Cloves, of each half a drachm: white-Hellebore one scruple, Mosch two graines, Tobacco half a scruple: mingle them, and make thereof a Powder, which must be snuffed up at the No∣strills.
A Powder for the coming down of the womb. Take Akorns, Cypress-Nuts, Bole-Armeniack, Dragons-blood, Mastich Balanstians, Acacia, Frankincense, of each half a drachm; and when it is powdered, sprinkle it upon the womb. A Powder for obstructions. Take the roots of China, flower de luce, and Sarsaperilla, Agarick, of each one drachm; Anniseed, Fennel, and Smallidg-seed, of each one drachm; the filings of Steel one drachm and half; the Salt of Wormwood, Spicknard, of each one scruple▪ Sugar two ounces: mingle them, and make thereof a Powder: the dose is one drachm and half, in white-wine, walking an hour after. A Powder to expell worms. Take the roots of Rhabarb, Asara∣bacca, and Ditany, of each one drachm; Coraline, Myrrhe, Citron-Pil, Ivory, harts-horn burnt, Purslaine-seed, red,
Corral prepared, Agarick, of each half a drachm; Saffron one scruple: mingle them, and make thereof a Powder: the dose is one drachm in Purslain-water and white-wine. A Powder for a Cancer in the mouth. Take of dryed Frogs, Crabs-Eyes, and Crabs-Claws, of each one drachm; burnt harts-horn half a drachm; mingle them, and with a quill blow the Pow∣der upon the ulcer. SACCƲLI: OR, Bags. A Sacculus to corroborate the head. TAke of the flowers of Chamo∣mile, Marjoran, Sage, Staechados, Betony, Roses, of each half an ounce: Cloves, Nutmegs, of each one
drach, sweet Cane one drachm and half; mingle them, and let them be powder∣ed and put into a Sacculus that is cut in the form of a Cap, the powder being quilted in it, and so the Cap worn up∣on the head. A Sacculus for the stomach. Take of Nutmegs, Cloves, Cinamon, Mint, Wormwood, Red-Roses, Galan∣gal, sweet Cane, of each two drachms; Mastich, Spicknard, Storax, Cassia-wood, Aloes-wood, of each one drachm; Mosch three grains; Gallia Moschata one scruple: mingle them, and make thereof a powder for a Sacculus; which must be quilted, and applyed to the Region of the stomach, and so worne. A Sacculus cooling the Liver. Take of the flowers of Buglos, Bo∣rage, Violets, Roses, both the Corrals, all the Sanders, of each one drachm; water-Lillies two scruples, Spodium one scruple, Camphor half a scruple: mingle them, and make thereof a Sac∣culus.
A Sacculus for the pain in the head, Cephalalgia. Take of the flowers of Violets, Roses, water-Lillies, of each one Pugil; the seeds of Lettice, Purslain, Henbane, white-Poppies, Lapis Hematitis, red-Corral, of each one drachm; all the Sanders, of each half a scruple: after they are powdered, let them be inclu∣ded in a Sacculus, and applyed to the front. SƲFFƲMIGIA: OR, Suffumigations. A Suffumigation for an Asthma and ulcerated Lungs. TAke of the Leaves of Hore-hound, Coltsfoot, Hyssop, Mai∣den-hair, Scabious, Red-Roses,
of each two drachms Turpentine two drachms, Olibanum, Mastich, Benzoin, of each one drachm, with Gum-Thra∣ganth, dissolved in cabious water: make them into Troches, which must be thrown upon burning Coales, morning and night, and the fume re∣ceived into the mouth and the bed. A Fumigation for a Catarrh. Take of Gum Juniper, Gum of Ivy, Red-Roses, Stora, Benzoin, of each two drachms; the Powder of the roots of Orris, the Leaves of Horehound, of each one drachm; Mastich, Frankincense, of each half a drachm; Nutmeg, Spick∣nard, of each one scruple; Saffron half a scruple: make thereof a gross powder, and with a little Turpentine reduced into Troches, let the fume be received as before. A Fumigation for Hysterical fits. Take Galbanum, Castoreum, Peuce∣dani, of each three drachms; Pepper one scruple, Opobalsamum half a scruple, Sulphur four grains: infuse the Galba∣num
in the best Vinegar, and let the rest be beaten and commixed with the Galbanum; part of which lay upon a Chafing-dish of Coals, and let the fume ascend up at the Nostrills and Pri∣vities. Or thus. Take Galliae & Aliptae Moschatae, Cinamon, Cloves, Mace, Laudanum, Storax, of each one drachm; Bayes, Marjoran, Calamus Aromaticus, Cassia-wood, of each two drachms: let them be powdered, and with Liquid Storax made into Troches, which lay upon a Chafing-dish of Coals, and set it so that the fume may ascend up at the Privities. A Fumigation for the coming down of the womb. Take of the juyce of Cystus, Acacia, Balanstians, Cypress-Nuts, Mirtle-berries, of each a drachm and half; Frankincense, Olibanum, Mastich, Dragons blood, of each one drachm: mingle them, and make thereof a Pow∣der, which throw upon live Coals,
which place between your Legs, that the fume may ascend into the womb, having a blanket wrapt close about you, that no air may expire. A Fumigation to provoke the Termes. Take of Peniroyal, Mugwort, Cala∣mint, Marjoran, the Leaves of Bays in powder, of each one drachm and half, Cassia-wood, Costus, Amomum, Cina∣mon, Cloves, Savine, Myrrhe, Galba∣num, Bay-berries, Indian Leaves, Orris-root, of each one drachm: make thereof a gross powder, which cast upon Coals, placed as before.
SƲPPOSITORIA: OR, Suppositories. A Suppository for such as desire to go to stool, but can do nothing; called by the Doctors Tenesmus. TAke Frankincense, Gum-Ara∣bick, Yellow-Wax, Opium, Saffron, of each one drachm; mingle them, make them into a Suppo∣sitory, which put up at the fundament, anointing the end of it with Butter. A Suppository for the Cholick passions. Take of the seeds of Annis, Fennel, Cummin, and Caraway, of each two scruples: Benedictum Laxativum, half a drachm; Coloquintida one scruple, Cambugia half a drachm, common Salt a drachm; and with concreted Hony
one ounce, make a Suppository, the length of ones finger. A strong and sharp Suppository. Take Hony boyled to a just Consist∣ency one ounce, Euphorbium, Colo∣quintida, of each six grains; black Helle∣bore, Scammony, of each one scruple. A common Suppository. Take Hony boyled and concreted one drachm; species Hierae one drach. Sal. Gem, Agarick, of each half a drachm: mingle them, and make there∣of a Suppository.
SYRƲPI: OR, Syrups. A solutive Syrup against Melancholy. TAke of the flowers of Borage and Bugloss, Rosemary, Cha∣momile, and Germander, of each half an ounce: black Hellebore, Sen∣na, Polypody, Epithimum, of each six drachms; the roots of Borage, Bugloss, and Maiden-hair, of each three dragms; Fumatory, Egrimony, of each one Pu∣gil: boyl them in water, till a third part be consumed; add the juyce of Pear∣mains, Fumatory, of each six ounces: and with a good quantity of Sugar, boyl it till comes to the Consistency of a Sy∣rup.
A Syrup for a Hectick Feaver. Take four snails prepared in white-wine, the flowers of Violets and Roses, French Barley, Maidenhair, of each one handful and half; the flowers of Borage and Bugloss, of each two Pugils; of the four greater Coole seeds, Liquorish, of each half an ounce: three Figs, Raysons stoned six dragms; Quince-seeds, Sorrel-seeds, of each half an ounce: sweet Al∣monds, Gum-Traganth, of each three drachms; Lettice and Purslaine, of each half an ounce, burnt Ivory two dragms; white-Poppy-seeds two drachms; boyl them till a third part be consumed, and to the Colature let four pound of Su∣gar be added, to boyl it up into a Sy∣rup. A Syrup purging the Spleen. Take of the seeds of Smallidg, Ash∣broom, Cardamoms▪ of each half an ounce: the roots of Dwarf Elder, black Hellebore, Asarabacca, Acorus, Mad∣der, Bryony, Orris, and Capers-root, of each half an ounce: the Cordial flowers
of each one pugil; Fumatory, Spleen∣wort, the flowers of Sage and Rosema∣ry, of each one handful; Senna Epithi∣mus, Polypody, of each one ounce and half: Wormwood, Tamaris, of each half a handful; Raysons cleansed two ounces; the seeds of Annis and Fen∣nel, of each three drachms; Gentian, Gum Lacc. sweet Cane, of each half an ounce: boyl them in Chalibeate-water, till the third part be consumed; and the Colature boyl up with Sugar into a Syrup. An Hydroptical Syrup. Take of the roots of Dwarf-Elder, Madder, Asarabacca, of each one ounce; Orris one ounce and half, the roots of Fennel and Parsly, of each half an ounce; Dodder, Egrimony, Endive, Betony, Ceterach, Wormwood, of each one handful; Liquorish half an ounce, Raysons stoned two ounces, the seeds of Meadow-Saffron bruised one drach. Senna two ounces and half, Polypody of the Oak four ounces, white Agarick three drachms, Turbith two drachms, the seeds of Melon, Carret, and Fennel,
of each one drachm; the flowers of Broom half a handful: Ginger, Mecho∣acan, Cinamon, of each two drachms; boyl them in water to twelve pints: to the Colature add our droptical Lixivium six ounces, Vinegar of Squills two ounc. Sugar as much as will suffice to boyl it up into a Syrup, according to art. A Sudorifick Syrup. Take of Lignum Sanctum one pound, the bark of the same half a pound: let them be infused in Rhenish-wine and water of each six pints, the flowers of Chamomile and Staechados, of each one handful; Liquorish one ounce: boyl them, and towards the end of the de∣coction, add the seeds of Annis and Fennel, of each two drachms; Setwel, and Angelico-roots of each half an ounce, the flowers of Borage and Bug∣loss, of each one Pugil and half: Saffron one drachm; strain it, and with a suffi∣cient quantity of Sugar, boyl it up into a Syrup, adding Salt of Wormwood two drachms.
A purging Syrup for the French Pox. Take Lignum Guaiacum one pound, the bark of the same three ounces, Sar∣saperilla two ounces, Hermodacts one ounce, Turbith, Mechoachan, of each half an ounce; sweet Cane, Thyme, of each two drachms; white-wine, foun∣tain-water, of each six pints: let the woods be powdered, and infused for the space of twelve hours, upon a gentle fire, afterwards boyl it for two hours together, adding Agarick half an ounce, Maiden-hair, Staechados, of each half a Pugil: boyl them againe, and at last add Epithimus one ounce, the flowers of Borage, Bugloss, and Rose∣mary, of each one Pugil; Senna one ounce and half: boyl them again gent∣ly, and then strain it, and let the Cola∣ture settle, and the limpid part boyl up with a sufficient quantity of Sugar, till it comes to a just Consistency. A Syrup provoking the Tearmes. Take Fumatory, Hyssop, Mugwort, Calamint, Marjoran, Peniroyal, Ger∣mander,
Hops, Thyme, Mother-wort, Maiden-hair, Balme, of each one hand∣ful; Savine two ounces, the five open∣ing roots, of each half an ounce: Aco∣rus, Anniseed, Fennel-seed, Origanum, Cinamon, Cassia-wood, the four grea∣ter Cool seeds, of each two drachms; sweet Cane one ounce, the Cordial flowers, of each one Pugil: Madder-root one ounce and half the roots of Valerian, and Birthwort, of each half an ounce; Juniper-berries two ounces, Saffron half a drachm: let these be boyled in a sufficient quantity of water; let the Colature be boyled with Hony to the just Consistency of a Syrup. A Syrup for the stone. Take of white-wine, fountain-water, of each two pints, the waters of Saxa∣frage, and Pellitory, of each a pint: the roots of Fennel, Parsly, Saxafrage, Rest-Harrow, of each half an ounce: the four greater Coole-seeds, of each two drachms; the seeds of Annis, sweet-Fennel, Parsly, Saxafrage, and Smallidge, of each three drachms; the seeds of Cummin prepared half an ounce: Grom∣wel-seeds
one ounce, Coriander pre∣pared two drachms; the roots of Bind-weed one ounce, winter-Cherries two ounces, Raysons stoned three ounces, Liquorish one ounce and half: mingle them, and boyl them till half the Li∣quor be consumed: add to the Colature Cassia newly extracted four ounces; and so with Sugar boyl it up into a Sy∣rup. A Syrup purging the Reines. Take of the roots of Dropwort, Rest-Harrow in powders, of each two scru∣ples, the seeds of Saxafrage & Grumwel, winter-Cherrys, Mallows, of each one drachm; the four greater Coole-seeds, Aniseed, of each half a drachm; Straw-berry-water, as much as will suffice to infuse them in a Bath, adding the flour of Cassia four ounces: afterwards strain it, and with Sugar boyl it gently into a Syrup. A Syrup for the Scurvy. Take of the juyces of Fumatory, Hops and Scurvygrss, of each one pint; juyce
of Egrimony and water-Cresses of each half a pound: let them be clarifyed, ad∣ding all the Sanders, of each one drachm, which with Sugar boyl up into a Syrup. Syrup of Lemons. Take a Lemon, and cut it in the middle, stuff in neatly ten Leaves of Gold; bind up the Lemon againe: be∣ware of letting out the juyce; and let the Lemon hang in the air, for three days: then press out the juyce, and with Sugar boyl it into a Syrup. And this is a very good Cordial upon alloccasions, having admirable ver∣tues in it. A Syrup for a cold. Take half a pint of Anniseed-water, and four ounces of Damask-Rose-wa∣ter, eight ounces of white Sugar-Candy: put the water and Sugar-Candy into a Bason, and set it over a Chafingdish of Coals; and when it boyleth, burn it as you do wine; stirring it till it will burn no longer: then take it off the fire, and
put in your Rose-water, and stir it till it be cold: of this take a spoonful at a time, as often as you please. TABELLAE: OR, Tablets. Cordial Tablets. TAke of species Diambrae, Dia∣mosch dulcis, Diarrhodon Abatis, both the Corrals, Laetitiae Galeni, of each one scruple: Aromacicum Roaum, Pearl prepared, of each half a scruple; Mosch eight grains, Sugar two ounces, Balm-water as much as will suffice to make it into Tablets, of which take one at a time. Other Cordial Tablets. Take of Loafe-Sugar half a pound: add to it Rose-water 2 ounces, dissolve
it upon the fire, and coct it to a just Consistency: then add Alkermes half an ounce, Pearle one scruple, Amber-grease six grains: cast them upon a Mar∣ble, and cut them Checquer-wise; eat one of them at a time. Tablets for the Epilepsy. Take Dianthos, Diambrae, Diamarg. of each two scruples, the roots and seeds of Pyony, of each half a drachm; Aromaticum Rosatum one scruple and half, conserve of Sage, our Treacle, of each one drchm; Castoreum half a drachm, Sugar five ounces: and with Betony-water form them into Tablets. Tablets for the Dropsy. Take the species of the 3 Saunders, Dialaccae, Diacurcumae magnae, of each one drachm; our Treacle one drachm and half; the seeds of Annis, Carret, Dwarf-Elder, and Fennel, of each half a drachm; Sugar six ounces: and with the water of Dwarf-Elder, make them into Tablets.
Tablets Corroborating the Ventricle and Matrix Take of sweet Cane, Galangal, the species of the three Peppers, Diacyna∣momi, of each one drachm; Cloves, Mace, Spodium, all the Saunders, Gal∣lia-Moschata, Coral, of each half a drach. Pearle one drach. Saffron one scruple, Amber half a scruple, dryed Mint one drachm, Sugar twelve ounces: and with the water of Mint, make them into Tablets. Tablets against abortion. Take of the powder of Red-Roses, Spodium, Pearle, both the Corals, the bone in the heart of a hart, of each half a drachm; Harts horn burnt half a drachm; Rhabarb Torrefied four scruples, Diamargar. two scruples, Su∣gar of Rosemary five ounces, Rose-water as much as will suffice to form them into Tablets according to art.
Tablets against a Gonorrhaea. Take Agnus-Castus-seeds, the seeds of Rue, Annis, Nettle, Mint, Lettice, Citron-pill, of each half a drachm; red-Corral, Troches of Amber, Frankin∣cense, Lignum-Aloes, of each two scruples and a half: powder of Turpen∣tine one drachm, Sugar half a pound: form them into Tablets according to art. Tablets cooling the Liver. Take the species of the three Saun∣ders one drachm; red Coral prepared, Melon-seed, Lettice and Endive, of each one scruple and half; Troches of Ivory burnt two scruples, Diarrhodon Abatis without the hot species one drachm, species Diamarg. rig. half a drachm; without Borage-water form them into Tablets.
ƲNGƲENTA: OR, Unguents. An Unguent against the disfigurement of the Measles. TAke of the flour of Lupines, Solomons seal, of each half an ounce; the Cerus of Lithargie, Sarcocolla, of each one drachm; Me∣lon-seed, Rose-water, of each two drachms; oyntment of Orenge-flowers, one drachm and half; Oyl of sweet Almonds one ounce: mingle them, and make them into an Unguent, with Hogs-suet, with which anoint the face where the marks are. An Oyntment to take away the prints of the small Pox. Take of sweet Almonds two ounces,
Dear-suet, Oyl of Eggs, Sperma-Caeti, of each half an ounce; Rose-water two ounces: incorporate them together, anoint the face therewith often. An ointment for the Scabs. Take Quicksilver killed in the juyce of Lemons and fasting Spittle two ounces, the powder of Enula campane, Lithargie, of each one ounce: Ung. Pso∣ricon Alex. one ounce and half: Tur∣pentine, Oyl of Bays, Ceruss washed in Fumatory-water, of each six drachms; Oyntment of Cerus two ounces: Frank∣incense, Mastich, of each two drachms; juyce of Fumatory half an ounce: pure Wax, Rosine of the Pine-tree, of each three drachms: mingle them, and by boyling, make them into an Unguent. An Ʋnguent to cool the Liver. Take of the juyce of Succory, and Roses, of each half an ounce: juyce of Lettice two drachms; Oyl Violets and Roses, of each half an ounce; Oynt∣ment of Saunders one ounce, red-Cor∣rel one drachm; the seeds of Sorrel,
Endive and Purslaine, of each half a drachm: Lambs-suet and Wax, of each one ounce; all the Saunders of each half a drachm: boyl them till the juyce be conumed; add Diarrhodon Abatis without its hot species two drachms: make it into an Unguent. An oyntment against the worms. Take of the juyce of Mugwort, Sa∣vine, of each half an ounce, the root of round Birthwort, Dittany, of each one drachm; Oyl of Orris, Bays, of each one ounce: Goose-grease one ounce and half, Saffron two drachms: Wax as much as will suffice: boyl it till the juyces be consumed.
VOMITORIA: OR, Vomiting Medicaments. A Syr. of Tobacco to cause vomiting. TAke of Tobacco one ounce, white-wine-Vinegar three ounces: infuse them for thirty hours, in a cold place: strain it, and with a sufficient quantity of Sugar coct it to a Syrup: the dose is one ounce or six drachms. Another. Take of Crocus Metallorum pow∣dered half an ounce, white-wine-Vi∣negar eight ounces: infuse them in a Bath twelve hours; strain it, add white Sugar four ounces, coct it to the Con∣sistency of a Liquid Oxymel. The dose is half an ounce or six drachms.
Another Vomit. Take Crocus Metallorum eight grains: infuse it in white-wine two ounces; to the Colature add Syrup of Violets one ounce: mingle them into a Vomiting Potion. Or thus. Take Hydromel two ounces, Asara∣bacca powdered one drachm: make it into a Haustus. Another Vomit. Take Gillae Theophrasti, or his Salt of white-Vitriol, half a drachm; dissolve it in any Liquor, and it will provoke gently to Vomit. Or thus. Take Gum. Cambugiae one scruple: Cremor Tartar half a scruple, Oxyacant one drachm; Oyl of Anniseed three drops: mingle them, and take it in the morning, keeping within doores.
A Vomiting water of Tobacco. Take of the best Rhenish-wine three pints, the Leaves of green Tobacco three handfuls; let them be distilled according to art, and the Liquor keep in a Glass well covered: the dose is one ounce; and the Remedy is most deli∣cate. A Vomiting Electuary of Hellebore. Take of white-Hellebore, dry and bruised, half a pound; common water six pints: make thereof an infusion for three days; afterwards boyl it till half be evaporated: make an Expression, to which add Hony one pound and half, and coct it to the Consistency of Hony: the dose is from an ounce and half to two ounces, taken in the decoction of Aniseed. But great care is to be had in the use of Hellebore; for according to Hippocrates judgment, it is very dangerous, and oftentimes causes Convulsions.
A Vomiting Potion. Take of the infusion of Crocus Me∣tallorum one ounce: Oxymel of Squills half an ounce, Mithridate one scruple, Carduus-water four ounces: mix them together for a Potion. Auxilium multis succus & herbafuit. Ovid. FINIS.
