S490 E392_6 99862060 154404
A LETTER FROM THE ARMY, Concerning the peaceable tem∣per of the same. Written by M. J. Saltmarsh atten∣ding his Excellency Sir Tho. Fairfax, and sent to a friend in London. June 10thLondon, Printed for Giles Calvert at the black Spread-Eagle, at the West end of Pauls Church. 1647.
Sir, SInce I came to the Army, I blesse God, I have seen no temper there, but in∣tendency to peace, and the preservation of the Kingdom; and they pro∣fesse unanimously, That when their just grievances are satisfied, and they estated in a free and cleer capacity as Subjects, as well as Souldiers, because they say, that will flow down upon all their fellow subjects in the Kingdome, who may be secured by the Parliament as to their civill rites, and
just liberties, they shall freely disband, or be commanded as the Parliament shall think fit in their wisdomes. There is a generall cry in the Coun∣tries as wee march, that the Army would help them, and be their Mediatours to the Parliament for Justice and Righteous∣nesse: They are generally much troubled about the burning of some Petitions. The Army are very sensible of the Coun∣tries grievances, being under a grievance themselves. The Country cry, Peace, Peace, let us have no more Forces raised to make new Warres. I hope the LORD will give a right understanding amongst peo∣ple, that the Army are wholly for Peace too. There is a Solemn Ingagement the whole Army hath entred into in order to their just grievances, at the last Rendezvou. There is a mighty spirit raised up in the Army for Justice and Righteousnesse; we admire at it.
They have solemnly ingaged against meddling with Church-Government, or doing any thing destructive to the fun∣damentall Constitution of the Civill Go∣verment of this Kingdome, to declare to all the world, they are not against Ma∣gistracy, and intend not to set up In∣dependency upon the Kingdome; for tru∣ly that were wholly to oppose their owne Principles, if they should have thoughts to force up any such thing, who desire that they should not be compelled themselves. I blesse God, I know no Designe here appearing, but Peace to the King∣dome. And this is the Principle of those who have the conduct of this Army, to indulge and cherish the Presbyterians who have any appearance of God, equally with any other. For the King's being here, I hope since it was contrary to all our knowledge, but to those Troopers, and Cornet Joyce, who acted the businesse, to prevent (as
they assure us) a practice against the PARLIAMENT, the KING∣DOME, and his PERSON, by rai∣sing up a new Warre. This is all I know of it; but I am confident that nothing will bee done as to this by this Ar∣mie, but that which may become honest men. I am informed Sir GILBERT GERRATT of the House should say with much confidence, That I hindred the Army from Disbanding the Generals Regiment: I wonder hee will upon so slight grounds asperse mee. I challenge all the World to be able to lay the least of that to my charge. It is a signe they know not the Army; for the Souldiery are acted by their owne Principles; They are an Army understand themselves, GOD is amongst them; and this whole yeer I have been with them, they can all witnesse, I never made State-businesse any Pulpit-work, I never yet preached
any thing but Christ. Indeed, formerly I was a stickler in York-shire for the Parlia∣ment; but I have been since taught (I blesse God) onely to pray for them and obey them. JOHN SALTMARSH. FINIS.
