S5119A 99895413 153002
THE Great, Useful and Blessed DUTY OF A Contentment, Willingness and Desire TO DIE: Set forth upon true and assured Grounds, in several Discourses on these following Scrip∣tures. Lord, now lettest thou thy Servant depart in Peace, according to thy word. For mine Eyes have seen thy Salvation, Luke 2. 29, 30. Into thine hand I commit my Spirit: Thou hast Redeemed me, O Lord God of truth, Psal. 31. 5. I have glorified thee on the Earth: I have finished the work which thou gavest me to do, John 17. 4. By RICHARD STAFFORD, A Servant of God and of the Lord Jesus Christ. Recommended as more proper and Beneficial to be given at Funerals than Gloves or Rings, LONDON, Printed and are to be sold by the Book-sellers of London and Westminster, 1700.
Lord, now lettest thou thy Servant depart in Peace, according to thy Word, For mine Eyes have seen thy Salvation, Luke 2. 29, 30. FRom these Words I shall treat (through God's Assistance, and according to the Knowledge given me, O continue thy loving kindness to them that know thee: and thy Righteousness to the upright in heart) of our contentment and willingness to Die, or depart from off this Earth. Why, Is there any need to perswade or exhort People to a Willingness and Desire to surrender back their Spi∣rits unto the God who gave them? This seems to be but what is Natural and Reasonable: Yet still there is a reluctancy and backwardness in our Spirits to do this; because the Spirit is conscious of having offended God, and is afraid to meet with him Angry, or as a God that aketh Vengeance. And therefore until this same God is perfectly Reconciled unto, and at Peace with her, and he is sensible and assured thereof, the Soul must needs be affraid and backward to come and appear before him. A diversity is to be observed, when it is written, Into thine hand I commit my Spirit: Thou hast redeemed me O Lord God of Truth. The Psalmist doth not here say, Thou hast Created me O Lord God of Truth. Though indeed this is true, yet that is not altogether so satisfying  Reason for him to willingly commit his Spirit into God's Hand, as the consideration of his having Redeemed
him is. Because that by Nature we are the Children of Wrath as well as others, and we are shapen in Iniquity, and in Sin doth our Mother conceive us. So that until this same Sin and Iniquity (which is the Object of God's Hatred, Displeasure and Punishment,) be done away, and we are Redeemed from it (for by his Redeeming us we are in a state of Reconcilation again) as this is God's Act al∣so as well as of Creating us, we are not meet, and con∣sequently there cannot be a Willingness upon good and true Grounds, to give up our Spirits unto God, or to say with old Simeon in the Text, Lord, now lettest thou thy Servant depart in Peace. Even this old Simeon, though he had already lived long on this Earth, yet he would not have been so con∣tented and desirous to have departed out of it, unless he was to depart in Peace. Not to depart generally as most People do, in doubt, fear and trouble, but to de∣part in Peace. If we could have our choice, and it were so in our power as to be Immortal here and never to Die; as for my part I should desire and pray unto God either to depart in Peace or not to depart at all: Fo as it is said of the Son of Perdition, It would have been good for him if he had never been Born: so it may be here affirmed of those who do not depart in Peace, It would be good for them not to depart, or not to dye at all. Not but that some may go off disturbedly, and yet go off safely. The Soul may be sometimes in a state of Peace, and yet not be sensible thereof. Who feareth th Lord, and obeyeth the voice of his Servant, and yet walketh in darkness, and have no light, Isa. 50. 10. But when one hath true and assured Grounds of Departing in Peace, as Simeon here had, there one may pray and appeal to God for him to let our Soul depart from the Body. What were those true and assured Grounds which Si∣meon had of departing in Peace? They are contained in the following Verse, For mine Eyes have seen thy Salvation. From hence it appears, that the true and assured Ground for which any one is willing and contented to Dye, is Because he hath seen the Salvation of God; or, for the com∣mitting our Spirit into the Hand of God, is, Because he hath Redeemed us.
Now to see the Salvation of God, or for God to Re∣deem us, do amount to near one and the same thing: As it is written, The Kingdom of God cometh not with Observation, (in the Margent there it is, with outward shew) Neither shall they say, Lo here, or Lo there, for be∣old the Kingdom of God is within you. So here it may be reasoned and supposed, The Salvation of God is not outward, nor yet cometh with Observation, but the Salvation of God is within us. It is wrought and ac∣complished within us. And thou shalt call his Name Je∣us, for he shall save his People from their Sins, Mat. 1. 21. Who is a Prince and a Saviour, and the Author of E∣ernal Salvation to all that obey him, and the Salvation of God. As to all this, Christ is no otherwise a Saviour, r doth save us, or is the Salvation of God, than as he oth save us from our Sins and turn us from our aiquities. For this is laying the Ax to the Root of e Tree and digging to the very Ground-work and oundation, because that only by reason of Sin we be∣me liable and obnoxious to Death, Misery and Punish∣ment. So that by certain and necessary Consequence,  we are saved from Sin, then also we are saved from eath, Misery and Punishment. Hence again appears, that this is the Salvation of God, to save us from our Sins, nd to save us from the Guilt and Corruption of our ature, from whence these same Sins do proceed forth. and so in those many places of Scripture where Salva∣tion belongeth unto our God and is ascribed unto him,  he is called the God of Salvation, there it is meant of ving us from our Sins. Where he saves from our E∣mies, Sin is the greatest Enemy; for 'tis Sin in such a an or Woman which only makes him or her to be our nemy. Thou hast led captivity captive, Psal. 68. 18. that  God hath led Sin and Corruption (which doth in∣lve the Children of Men in Captivity) Captive, by  having received gifts for Men. And then it follows, lessed be the Lord, who daily loadeth us with Benefits: and imating thereby, that to be saved from our Sins, or to d that Captive which before held us in Captivity, is  greatest Benefit. And then it follows, Even the God
of our Salvation, Selah. He that is our God, is the God of Salvation; and unto God the Lord belong the Issues from Death. In saving us from Sin God doth save us from Death also, inasmuch as Death is by reason of Sin. And therefore Jesus Christ in whom was no sin, he be∣ing the Holy one of God: Therefore he should not see corruption, and it was not possible that he should not be holden of Death, as Peter doth truly averr it. So that as God and Christ do save us from sin, unto God do belong the Issues from Death; for there is a flowing and rising and deliverance from that again. As health is an hold∣ing together of Temporal Life, so Holiness or freedom from sin is the Principle and beginning of Eternal Life. It is an act of Salvation or saving to subdue: And as to this also, we have God speaking on this wise, He will turn again, he will have compression upon us, he wi subdue our iniquities Micah 7. 19. which indeed is the greatest instance of compassion that can be shewed un∣to us Men, for unless God did subdue our Iniquities we must die, perish, and be miserable for ever. Now to Subdue our Iniquities, is to conquer and sub∣due the reigning Nature and Power of them, so that they shall not involve us into the Death of Sin here nor yet into the Damnation of Hell hereafter. Having thus Explained what Salvation is, in order that we may the better understand those true and as∣sured grounds of a willingness to dye when we have seen the Salvation of God wrought and accomplished upon and within our Souls; Proceed we to speak  the Nature of Redemption, which is also another tr and assured Ground of committing our Spirit into th hand of God, because thou hast Redeemed us, O Lor God of Truth. The signification of which Redemption may be Understood from what is written, Forasmu as ye know that ye were not Redeemed with Corruptib things as Silver and Gold from your vain Conversation receiv by tradition from your Fathers. And as the same Apost doth elsewhere phrase it, By these you might be part∣kers of the Divine Nature, (which none can be un be is first Redeemed from the corrupt Nature a
from the Body of Sin which we carry about us) having escaped the Corruption that is in the World through lust. So that to be Redeemed from Corruption and from Lust, both which are very much in the World, this s Redemption. Upon my Discoursing these things, Ex∣amine your selves whoso shall hear or Read these Lines, can ye thus find and witness Redemption in your own Souls; That is, do ye feel and Experience inward∣ly a Redemption in ye from that vain Conversation, which is so much used and practised by other People) and also a Redemption from Corruption, and from Lust? If it is so Indeed and in Truth, then ye have purchased a good degree in the Faith, and ye have made a considerable Advancement and Proficiency in the Christian-Life; So that ye are in a readiness and willingness to Commit your Spirits into the hand of God, because he hath Redeemed them. And then in Psal. 31. 5. He is called the Lord God of Truth, Intimating thereby, that he doth Redeem and Sanctifie them by his Truth. There is another Scripture which doth clearly open the Nature of Redemption, These were they which were ot defiled with Women, these were Redeemed, (observe that) rom among Men, being the first Fruits unto God and to he Lamb. And in their Mouth was found no Guile, for they were without fault, before the Throne of God, Rev. 14. 4. 5. t is here to be taken notice of how the Scripture in his and many other places doth in a wonderful man∣ner Instruct People in these things of Holiness, per∣ection and Innocency. It is the Point or End which ll Scripture doth drive at and lead unto. But in this lace, to be Redeemed doth import to be Redeemed om among Men, and not to be defiled with Wo∣men; That is, not to be Tainted or Touched with the Temptation of either, to be freed from Lust, (Concupi∣cence) and from the motions of Sins in our Members, and to have in our Mouth no Guile found, and to be without fault before the Throne of God. Such are his Re∣deemed and Sanctified ones. And the Ransomed of the Lord, (elsewhere called the
Redeemed of the Lord, Isa. 51. 11. shall return and com to Zion with Songs and Everlasting joy upon their Head They shall obtain joy and Gladness, and Sorrow and Sighing shall flee away. Isa. 35. 10. In truth none hav such Reason to be joyful as these Redeemed of the Lord; for nothing can possibly hurt them. Not Me nor Devils, nor yet Death it self; which is the mo Melancholy thing and of doubtful Expectation as t other People, for by Death they are received into God hand, the place of Everlasting joy. There is yet another Scripture which Explains th Nature of Redemption, Who gave himself for us that  might Redeem us from all Iniquity, and Purifie unto him self a peculiar People zealous of good Works. Titus, 2. 1▪ The Scripture is all along consonant and agreeable to  self, for this Redeeming from all Iniquity, and Purifyi answers exactly to that place aforementioned of bein without Guile and to have no fault. A state of Innocen is a state of Redemption; for it is a state of Redeption from Sin, Guilt and whatever may hurt or ma the Soul miserable. It is a Redeeming from Captivit Bondage and Thraldom, from the Vassalage of Stan and the Imprisonment of Hell, which as we  come Obnoxious unto, only by reason of Sin, Iniqui and Transgression: So as we are Redeemed from the we are consequently Redeemed and saved from t other also. Besides these two Grounds of having seen the Salvtion of God and his having Redeemed us, there is anoth for our willingness and contentment to dye from wh is written, I have Glorified thee on the Earth, I ha finished the Work which thou gavest me to do, And n come I to thee, John 17. 4. 13. Now seeing that who God did foreknow He did also Predestinate to be confmed unto the Image of his Son, that he might be t first Born amongst many Brethren: So that we m assuredly Reason that every Servant of God may up true grounds be willing to dye and to come unto G when he hath before Glorified him on the Earth, a finished the Work which God gave him to do;A
now come I to thee. Words full of consolation and re∣joycing! Like as when a Servant is sent out to such a place about his Masters Business when he hath done it he returns to his Master with rejoycing and com∣placency of mind. Even so God our Creator sent us Reasonable Creatures to do his Work and Business, Wist ye not that I must be about my Fathers Business, Luke 2. 49. Said Jesus Christ his beloved Son who herein left us an Example that we should follow his steps. Now certainly it must be a Satisfaction to the Creature when he hath done the Work and Will and Business of his Crea∣tour, according as it was expected from him; and consequently the Creature can then return with more Comfortable Expectation unto him, And now come I to thee. We cannot better and more willingly surrender back our Spirits to the God who gave them, then when they have faithfully performed that very same thing, for which God sent these Spirits into these Bodies for to do. And now, O thou invisible Creator, the in∣visible part of us which was by thee Created, comes to thee. From what hath been afore written it appears, that there are three things especially which upon good and true grounds, can make any one contented willing and desirous to Dye. First, When one hath seen the Salvation of God. Secondly, When the Lord God of truth hath Redeemed us: Thirdly, When one hath Glorified God on Earth, and finisbed the Work which he gave us to do. It was Revealed unto Simeon by the Holy Ghost, that he should not see Death until he had seen the Lord's Christ. And he came by the Spirit into the Temple, and when his Parents brought in the Child Jesus to do for him after the Custom of the Law. then took he him in his Arms and Blessed God and said, mine Eyes have seen thy Salvation. So that Simeon his seeing the Salvation of God was see∣ing Jesus Christ in the Flesh. But since the fullness of time is over and past we cannot now see him in the Flesh here on Earth, yet we may see him in his Grace
and Revelation. But chiefly to see Christ, the Salvati∣on of God, the Power of God, and the Wisdom of God, is with the Eyes of our Understanding being enlightened and turned inwards to see Christ within us. Little Children of whom I travail in Birth till Christ be formed in ye; And so to have Christ formed in us, this is to see the Salvation of God. Now this is a work of time and succession as it is of forming the Infant, in the Womb. To have or see Christ formed within us, is the Business and Work of our whole Life here on Earth, which the Preaching and Ministry of the word doth help unto. And when once Christ is throughly formed within us, and we see the Salvation of God, then we may be well contented, willing and Desirous to dye for this Reason. For as when the Chick sees the Kite or Hawk which would devour it, if she can run under the Hens wings, then she is safe; For as the Hen was at first Instrumental to give it Life and Being, so it will still preserve it. Even so by seeing the Lord's Christ who is the Prince of Life and the Salvation of God, the faith∣ful Soul who is in Covenant with him runs, and makes unto Christ, who promises and performs it also: He shall cover thee with his Feathers, and under his Wings shalt thou trust, Psal 91. 3. and gathereth his Children together even as a Hen gathereth her Chickens under her wings. Here let Death and the Devil come and destroy that Soul if they can; Christ is greater in power and might▪ Forsamuch then as the Children were partakers of Flesh and Blood he also himself took part of the same, that he through Death might Destroy him that had the Power of Death that is the Devil: And destroy them who through fear of Death were all their life time Subject to Bondage. If we are first saved from Sin and Guilt, then w are also saved from the wrath to come. And then w may be contented and willing to dye, for therefore People are afraid to dye, Because they are afraid to fall under the wrath of God. Now if they are sure and safe from that then Death is without any sting at all which is Sin. And then also we shall be safe, saved and preserved from all the Evils Plagues and Punishment
of the World to come; So that after all the Miseries and Irksomness of this present Life (for as there is a satiety of all things, so at length there is a satiety even of Life it self) after all the toyl and wearisomness and labour thereof God our Creator will comfort us for this same toil and the times of Refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord: Blessed be his Name for it. He doth here in this valley of Tears and place of Weeping afford us some good and Comfortable things, yet seeing that he hath appointed our time on Earth as the days of an Hire∣ling we may willingly and contentedly give up our Breath and commit our Spirits into his hand saying with old Simeon, Lord, now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace according to thy word, for mine Eyes have seen thy Salvation. Because we shall have yet better and more Satisfactory things when we depart hence. To be patient to Live and willing to Dye is the tem∣per and disposition of Soul which I desire and would endeavour at; And this my willingness to dye should not proceed out of a Melancholy temper: Like Jonah in an Angry Mood who would have the Lord to take his Life from him, For it was better for him to Dye than to Live: only forsooth because he was displeased at the time that the Lord did not destroy Nineveh, according to the word which he had Preached; But this was only a pettish hu∣mour of his: And so others at this day upon a sudden Affliction and Vexation are forthwith weary of the world and call to Death to come and ease them of the present Burthen, Trouble, Grief or Uneasiness. But give me the mind that is willing to dye upon the same Reason as the Apostle was, Having a desire to depart and to be with Christ which is far better Phil. 1. 23. Then the best condition here on Earth: when also it can truly be said To me to dye is gain. For by Death I shall gain or get more Good, more Satisfaction, more Comfort, more Happiness and Blessedness then ever I had on this Earth. Then only Death is gain when to live is Christ; when we lay out our selves and live only for Christ that is in his ser∣vice and to get Christ formed within us, then truly Death is gain; But if on the other hand People live to
themselves or for themselves as in the service of Mam mon and for Pleasure, and they are wanton on the Earth the consequence thereof is they have nourished their heart as in the day of Slaughter, or against the day of Slaughte to such to dye is not Gain but Loss; for thereby they los their Pleasure, they lose their Mammon and they receive n good instead thereof, but only Punishment and wrath Blessed are the Dead which dye in the Lord. But 'tis only those who live unto the Lord that is in his service and Obedience that Dye in the Lord. If we mean to gain by ou Death that is to get and obtain more good thereby tha we had here; we must do somewhat for it whilst we are in Life, according to what the same Apostle elsewhere witnesseth of himself which is also applicable to other Peo∣ple who would have and enjoy the same good things, For I am now ready to be offered and the time of my departure is at hand. I have fought a good Fight, I have finished my course I have kept the Faith, henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness; which the Lord the Righteous judge shall give me at that day, and not unto me only, but unto a them also that love his appearing. The Crown of Righ∣teousness will not be had by any one, until he hath first fought the good fight and kept the Faith. There is no departing in peace according to the word of God, or according to the understanding desire of the Reason∣able Creature without having first seen the Salvation of God. The second true and assured ground of a content∣ment, willingness and desire to dye is, when the Lord God of truth hath Redeemed us. Sanctifie them through thy truth, Thy word is truth. And so the same God, that doth Sanctifie his People through his truth, doth also Redeem them through his truth, or by his word of truth. When we are once throughly Redeemed and Sanctified by the truth of God, then we may com∣mit our Spirits into the hand of God. For then these Spirits of ours are Redeemed and Sanctified from what∣ever Defilement and Corruption they had from the Body, and from the things of this Earth; Then the Spirit returns to God again the same as it was when
he gave it. The Temple of God is Holy; which Temple ye are. And so God expects that that Spirit which he Created Holy (for so it was before it is defiled with the Body of Death) should be kept and preserved Holy; but chiefly it should be Sanctified, that is, made Holy, just as it comes to be surrendred and given back unto God. Every Like loves its Like, and an Holy God loves an Holy Soul. The Scripture expres∣sly affirmeth it, Without Holiness no Man shall see the Lord; which implyes the contrary, that with Holiness, or when the Soul is endued or clothed with Holiness, it shall then certainly see the Lord to its endless Com∣fort and Rejoycing The great and principal Business we have to do here on this Earth, and as we are going off from it (which we do continually as soon as we are Born) is to dye to Sin, (I dye Daily, saith the Apostle) and to get Holi∣ness ingrafted into the Soul. As we are day after day approaching nearer and nearer unto the Grave, here let us examin and prove our selves, whether we are yet more Dead unto Sin, and have Holiness yet more ingrafted into our Souls; Whether as our desires grow more languid and unaffected as to Creature Comforts and to creature enjoyments (by having had them over and over so often already) So the same desires are more from Sin and Vanity, and the more thirst after God: And after the Enjoyment of him in his Kingdom so as to cry out from the real sense, bent and inclination of our Souls, As the Hart panteth after the Water Brooks, so panteth my Soul after thee O God! When we can say in truth and seelingly within our self, there is none upon Earth I desire besides thee. And when in old Age we cannot tast what we Eat or what we Drink, When the Keep∣ers of the House shall tremble and those that look out of the Windows are Darkened; when the Grashopper shall be a bur∣then and desire shall fail; My Flesh and my Heart faileth, if then God is the strength of our Heart and our Portion for ever. For so the right Consequence is, and Endea∣vours should be used accordingly: That as our outward Man decays day by day, so we should be more renew∣ed
in the inward Man. As the day approaches con∣tinually nearer and nearer when we shall outwardly go off from this Earth, the more we should be Redeemed from the Earth; that is, we should be Redeemed from the Evil and Defilement, and Corruption of this Earth, before we can upon Assured grounds commit our Spirit into the hand of God. Besides this of being Redeemed from our vain con∣versation and from the Corruption of our Nature, and of being without Guile and Fault before the Throne of God; The chief and especial Redemption is that which was wrought and accomplished by Jesus Christ, who in his Love and Pity hath Redeemed them, and he bare them and he carried them all the days of old Isa. 63. 9. Even Jesus which delivered us from the wrath to come. Who bought us with a price and purchased us with his own Blood. As God the Father Redeemed and brought up the Israelites out of the Land of Aegypt; Whereby he was in a more especial manner their God, for the Re∣deemer hath a right in the Redeemed: Even so God by his Son Jesus Christ hath Redeemed Mankind from Spi∣ritual Aegypt from the Slavery and Bondage of Sin and Satan and Death. Christ hath Redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a curse for us. And it was this Redemption wrought and accomplished by Jesus Christ, who was of the seed and linage of David, whom the Scripture therefore calls the Son of David, which David speaks of by the Spirit and had respect unto, when he said, Into thine hand I commit my Spirit, Thou hast Redeemed me O Lord God of truth. To pursue the very same Reasoning here as is in Acts 2 25, 30. 32. For David speaketh concerning him, Thou hast Redeemed me O Lord God of truth, For being a Prophet and knowing that God had sworn with an Oath to him, (In fulfilling of which he is here fitly called the Lord God of truth) That of the fruit of his loins, according to the Flesh he would raise up Christ to sit on his Throne and to Redeem Mankind by him: He seeing this before spake of the Redemption of Christ, Thou hast Redeemed me O Lord God of truth: It being the usual stile of Prophecies to speak of that as alrea∣dy
past which is to come. Whereby is shewn forth the immutable truth of the Eternal God, for what he hath decreed in his Eternal counsel and purpose, it is as certain as if it was already past and fulfilled. As Abraham saw his day and was glad, so here David saw his day and was glad. And truly well they might for saith the Apostle in the Persons of the Regenerate, for we were by Nature Children of wrath as well as others: So that Abraham and David were Chil∣dren of wrath also; And then both of them might well be glad to foresee by Faith this Jesus Christ who was to Redeem them from the wrath to come. The word, Redemption, is a relative term, and doth presuppose captivity, thraldom, or the being sold; from all which Redemption doth lose and set free again. And so this Jesus Christ, travelled in the greatness of his strength and was mighty to save, he led Captivity Cap∣tive, that is, he led even Sin and the Devil Captive, which before did lead and hold People in captivity, who from their inslaving Nature are here expressed not to be only Captivating Men, but they are Captivity it self in the Abstract: Intimating thereby, that these who are under the power of Satan, (For so the Scripture expresses it, to turn from Darkness unto Light, and from the pow∣er of Satan unto God) they are in the utmost Captivity, yea worse than that is of those that are bound with Chains and Fetters, although these are seen but the others are to be understood and felt by such who are in the Bond of Iniquity. Acts 9. 23. For Sin, iniquity and lust are as a Chain or Bond, which doth hold and hamper People therein, that they know not yea, they cannot without Christ that strengtheneth them, get out and extricate themselves from it. Now as Jesus doth save his People from their sins, he doth in this sense Preach deliverance to the Captives, and set at liberty them that are bound, and Redeem them who for their Iniquities had sold themselves, Isa. 50. 1. Even unto the Devil and Hell, the place of Damnation and eternal Punishment. And having spoiled Principalities and Powers, he made a shew of them openly, triumphing over them. The Princi∣palities
and Powers here meant are the Principali∣ties of the other World, the Powers of Darkness and the Devil who is the Prince of the Power of the Air; Here Jesus Christ is said to have spoiled the Princi∣pality and Power of the Devil, which he hath done to such as are Christs, for over such the Devil hath no Principality or Power, and triumphed over them in him∣self, so that since he hath Redeemed ransomed and pre∣served us from all the evil and terrible things of the future and invisible world which we immediatly enter into by Death; And then we may be willing contended and desirous to dye, when we are assured before hand that God hath by his Son Jesus Christ Redeemed us from all the Power of the Enemy and from all the evil things of the other World; So that nothing there shall in the least hurt us, much less torment and make us miserable. And thus these two Expressions, Lord lettest thou thy Servant depart in peace, according to thy word, for mine Eyes have seen thy Salvation; Into thine hand I commit my Spirit, thou hast Redeemed me O Lord God of truth, do fall in and meet together near to same sense and mea∣ning even according to the requiring and earnest de∣sire of the reasonable Creature, who would fain not be miserable hereafter. The one signifies to be saved and the other to be Redeemed from the wrath to come, which are one and the same thing. The consequence again is certain, if we are saved from the wrath to come, then we shall enjoy the Blessedness (come ye Blessed of my Father) to come as the Scripture saith, Whosoever was not found written in the Book of Life, was cast into the Lake of fire: So it may be reasoned on the other side, whosoever shall not be cast into the Lake of fire shall enter into Life, so that if we are saved and Redeemed from the Lake of fire, we shall enter into life and ever∣lasting happiness. Now seeing that the decree of God standeth on this wise, we may upon very good reasons not only say so contentedly, but also really assent un∣to the same in our minds, being contented willing and desirous from the ground of our heart that it should be so, Lord now lettest thou thy Servant depart in peace,
for mine Eyes have seen thy Salvation, into thine hand I ommit my Spirit, thou hast Redeemed me O Lord God of truth. The third true and assured ground of a contentment, willingness and desire to dye, is when we have glorified God on the Earth and finished the work which he gave us  do. Even every one that is called by my name; For I have created him for my Glory, I have formed him, yea I have made him, this People have I formed for my self, they shall hew forth my praise Isa. 43. 7, 21. Thou art worthy O Lord to receive Glory and Honour and Power, for thou hast Crea∣ted all things, and for thy pleasure they are and were Crea∣ted, Rev. 4. 11. Herein is my Father glorified that ye bear much fruit, John 15. 8. From all these Scriptures consider∣ed together it appears that the end and intent of God's creating People is for his own Glory and Praise, and that he might have fruit from them, or that they should bring forth fruit unto God. For the Son of Man is as a Man aking a far journey who left his House and gave Authori∣ to his Servants and to every Man his Work, and com∣manded the Porter to watch, Mark 13. 34. And so it may be conceived after the same similitude of things, that Almighty God the great Creator, who is now in Heaven the habitation of his Holiness, which is afar off and many Millions of miles distance; But the Earth his house or one art of the House of his Creation, He hath left and ave to the Children of Men, and gave Authority to his ervants, as Rulers and Ministers have; For none are so  to have Authority as those who are indeed the Ser∣nts of God; And to every Man his work, and com∣manded the Porter to watch, so that every Man hath recei∣ved his work from God for him to do and finish on this Earth; And accordingly as he doth and finisheth this work here on Earth, he can both surrender back his pirit and also give up his account with joy and not with grief, which would be unprofitable for him. Now what is it to glorifie God here on Earth? I an∣wer in General, It is to observe to do the statutes and udgements of the Lord God of our Fathers in the Land hich he giveth us to possess it, all the days we live upon
Earth, Deut. 12. 1. To fear God and keep his Command∣ments is to be our constant business and work all our life long, but there being divrsuies of gifts, but the same Spirit, and there are differences of Administrations; but it is the same God that worketh all in all; But the Manifestation of the Spirit is given to every Man to profit withall, 1 Cor. 12. 4. 5. 6, 7, This spake he signifying by what Death he should Glori∣fie God, John 21. 19. And so according as there are diversities of gifts and differences of operations in People, and as one glorifies God by his Death one way and another, another: So there are divers ways and different manners of Glorifying God according to the se∣veral cases, circumstances, conditions, or rather ac∣cording to the several gifts and endowments in Peo∣ple. By what Death he should Glorifie God. Now in Death there is bitterness and hardship (it being the hardest and most terrible thing in the world to dye) from hence we gather that when we poor Creatures submit or subject our selves to hardship or difficulty either in obedience to the Commandments of God, or according to the decree and appointment of God, this is a glori∣fying God, and God is Glorifyed thereby: When Christ his only begotten Son came to taste of that bitter Cup, he saith, Now is my Father glorified, but for this hour came I into the World. In the divers kinds of Death some are more shameful and painful then others, as to be hanged on a Gallows or Gibbet, or to be nailed on the Cross is more shameful and painful, than to dye of a common Disease in our Bed; yet from hence it follows that as Jesus Christ our Lord and forerunner was made a curse of God for us, as cursed is every one that hangeth on a Tree; And as himself, who suffered for us, leaving us an example that we should follow his steps, did herein undergo both the pain and the shame, therefore the more painful and shameful the Death is (provided always that it be in a way of duty, and in obedience unto or keeping the Commandments of God) So much the more God is glorified thereby. Which consideration if it be throughly weighed in our minds,
should make us earnestly desire Martyrdom and not to be afraid of or decline from it. Hence it follows that to take up the Cross, yea to take up the Cross dai∣y (saith Christ, He that taketh not up the Cross daily, annot be my Disciple) Which is to cross and do con∣rary to our Natural Inclinations, this also is a glori∣ying God, and God is so much the more glorified; Ac∣cording as so much the more the Cross is taken up From hence again it follows on the contrary, that where a thing is easie and customary, God is not al∣ogether so much glorified thereby. To go on in a course of outward and perfunctory Worship, when the Wor∣shippers at the same time commit Sin, Iniquity, Trans∣ression, and Hypocrisy, God is not at all glorified hereby; yea, he is rather dishonoured according to hat is written, Thou that makest thy boast of the law, hrough breaking of the law dishonourest thou God? For the ame of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles, through you, s it is written. Rom. 2 23. 24, And when they entred nto the heathen whither they went, they prophaned my holy ame, when they said to them, these are the people of the ord and are gone forth out of his land. Ezek. 36. 20. And so Hypocritical Worshippers give great occasion, (as Nathan told David, he did by his Sins of Adultery and urther) to the Enemies of the Lord to Blaspheme, By givi∣g occasion to the lewd and prophane sort, or to the eople of the World, to cry out and say, these be your eligions who do such abominable and evil things; nd it gives occasion to think as if the God, whom hey pretend and outwardly seem to Worship and serve, ere altogether such as themselves. Psal. 50. 21. Or as  his Commandments (which are Holy just and good) nd Religion did teach and allow them to do such evil nd shameful things, And many shall follow their perni∣ous ways, by Reason of whom the way of truth shall be Evil oken of. 2 Pet. 2. 2. In verse. 14. They are called cur∣d Children, as indeed cursed are all they that err from is Commandments. Instead of bringing glory unto God, s they would seem by their outward Worship, like em that bended the knee and cryed, hail Master, and
yet crucified him, so do these Crucifie the Lord of Glo afresh and put him to an open shame. Of such it is said, What judgment of a long tim lingreth not, and their damna on slumbreth not. Hypocrites are ranked in their co∣demnation before unbelievers. Said Jesus Christ who to be judge of all the Earth, and therefore knows ho it will go at the last day; Give him his Portion with H pocrites and unbelievers. Now an Hypocrite is one who outwardly Worshi God (whereby he seems to be Religious) and yet at  same time lives in the continued breach of his Co mandments. Like as a stage Player acts the Person another, then really himself is, Even so the Hypoc acts the Person of another, for he seems Religious his constant outward Worship, and to be an obedi Servant of God, when in truth he is neither. If Man among you seemeth to be Religious and bridleth his Tongue, but deceiveth his own Heart (A true scription of an Hypocrite, for none deceives his o Heart so much as he; For such take up the outw Profession out of some hope to go to Heaven, when t will not, as well as to get credit and Reputation amo Men) That Mans Religion is vain. James 1. 26, S may be applied and reasoned, as to the neglect or  ure in any other duty, For all their seeming to be ligious, this or that Mans Religion is vain. And for his seeming to be an obedient Servant of the L God, when he despiseth his Word and Commandm and when he doth according to his own will and mour, any Law or Ordinance of God to the cont notwithstanding; when he transgresseth this or that ∣cept according as his pleasure or profit swayes and clines him. Even knowing and understanding Men  plainly see and discern his Hypocrisy and Dissimula herein, much more will the alwise God, who is a Go knowledge, and by him actions are weighed, Who sear the Heart and tryes the Reins to render unto every  according to his ways, and according to the fruit o∣doings. Men may, yea they do deceive their own s and others also; But they can never deceive God.
o the alwise God will never be imposed upon, as if ch did serve and Honour him, (notwithstanding all eir outward Pretences) who do in truth dishonour him, nd make his name polluted, and evil thought of and il spoken of among the Heathen or ungodly sort of ankind. I have heard it related concerning the Turks, that then they have promised a thing, if they are asked to nfirm it further by writing, they will answer with dignation, Do ye think that I am a Christian to falsify  word, that I must be forced to perform it by giving somewhat derhand. For they observe more truth and just dealing between Man and Man when it is only by word of mouth en many called Christians, but worse then heathen and fidels in practice, for many who name the name of rist, will falsify their word and bond also when it  in their power so to do. Which seems to be to the utter ame and reproach of Christianity it self, but rather it is  the utter shame and reproach of such false preten∣ers to Christianity. Such who wrongfully take upon emselves the name of Christians, do make the name  Christ, the Lord of Glory, evil spoken of amongst e Turks and unbelievers, and it carries a suspicion  if the God and Christ (whom they seem outwardly  serve and worship) did teach and allow them in ch falshood and unjust dealing; which the soul of od hates and his Commandments are express against . Hear what the answer of God saith to such, To what rpose is the multitude of your sacrifices unto me, saith the ord, I am full of the burnt offerings of rams and the fat  fed beasts and I delight not in the blood of bullocks, or  lambs, or of he goats, When ye come to appear before me ho hath required this at your hand to tread my courts; ing no more vain oblations, incense is an abomination to me; e new moons and sabbaths and the calling of the assemblies cannot away with: It is iniquity, even the solemn meeting d when ye spread forth your hands, I will hide mine eyes om you, yea, when ye make many prayers I will not hear,
your hands are full of blood. Wash ye, make you clea put away the evil of your doings from before mine eye cease to do evil, learn to do well. Intimating hereby, th until people did actually put away the evil of their doing and cease to do evil, all their acts of outward Worship all their going to Church or Meeting on the Lor'ds da how constant soever they are therein, all their ma prayers offered up unto him every morning and eveni nay if it be at noon each week day, are not pleas and acceptable in the sight of the Lord; and consequent they do not at all glorifie him thereby, for himself he saith that he will not receive them, that he doth  require it at their hands, who are sinners and works of iniquity to tread his courts, but this he requireth his saints and servants so to do; that he cannot aw with their calling of the assemblies when such come i to the congregation, their appointed times of Wor his soul hateth, they are a trouble to me, I cannot be them; all these sayings do import, they do not please G and conscequently they do not glorifie him. By the way, there is no doctrine more necessary a useful to be continually made known and preached th this, for it is the common and uniuersal deceit which  people of this generation and Country, yea of all c stendom go upon: If they go constantly to Church Meeting upon the first day of the week, and those the richer sort have Worship in their respective fami every morning and evening, they think and say to t souls, all is well enough. As the fool said in the gos Thou hast much goods laid up for many years, take thine ea, drink and be merry, so these foolish and deceived pe who serve divers lusts and pleasures, do say to themse Soul, that course of Worship and Religion aforeme oned will carry thee to Heaven; be quiet as to  further thoughts or doubts concerning futurity, only sure to go on therein, eat, drink and be merry; take, g and enjoy as much of the world and worldly comfort ever thou canst. But in the mean while and all along t not do rame their doings to turn unto God. They do not fra or square all their doings according to the great Rul
ghteousness in Scripture. They do not put away the evil  their doings. For many of their ways are contrary unto  different from the Word and Law of God. Until peo∣e do actually put away the evil of their doings, d doth not accept of their several acts of Worship.  We are of them that believe to the saving of the soul, Heb. . 39. And so there is a sort of People who Serve and orship God to the saving of their Souls; that is, such o do it inwardly, and who obey constantly from the art all the Words of God's Law and Gospel' Again, ere is another sort, whereof are the greater number (Broad he way and wide is the gate which leadeth to destruction, d many there be who go in thereat) who do not serve and orship God to the saving of their Souls; for these wor∣ip him outwardly, and they do not confirm all the ords of God's Gospel to do them, and so now they are ble unto and will at length fall under that everla∣ng destruction which will be unto them that obey not e Gospel. For he is not a Jew which is one outwardly (and it may be truly Reasoned, He is not a Christian or vant of God who is one outwardly) neither is that Cir∣mcision which is outward in the flesh, but he is a Jew who one inwardly (and so he is a Christian who is one in∣ardly) and Circumcision is that of the heart in the Spirit and  in the Letter; whose praise is not of Men but of God, Rom.  28, 29. For I say unto you, that except your Righteousness all exceed the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall  no case enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 5 20. And  it may be truly Reasoned and Applyed to the Peo∣e of this Generation, Except your Religion shall exceed e Religion which is according to the Standard and urse of this World, it will be in no wise a Religion  the saving of your Souls. Let that kind of outward Worshippers aforementioned editate throughly upon the significancy of these follow∣g Scriptures, But unto the Wicked (God saith) What hast ou to do to declare my Statutes, or that thou shouldst take my venant into thy Mouth? Seeing thou hatest Instruction and stest my Words behind thee, Psal. 50. 16, 17. And so this nd of outward worshippers do hate him that Rebuketh in
the Gate, they abhor him that speaketh uprightly. Saith t Apostle, The time will come (but I who live nearer un the ends of the World do Testifie, that what he the foretold of, is now fulfilled; for at this day the time  come) that they will not endure sound Doctrine, but after the own lusts shall they heap to themselves Teachers, having Itchi Ears, 2 Tim. 4. 3. Which say to the Seers, see not, and to  Prophets, Prophesie not unto us right things, speak unto  smooth things, Prophesie Deceits, Isa. 30. 10. This day  this Scripture fulfilled in our Ears; for they go constan∣ly to them who speak smooth things, and Preach Deceit And they will not come to hear him that Preacheth rig things, which is verified as to the People of this Genera∣on and Country, And as to him who Writeth these thing for they do not receive his Testimony, John 3. 32. But ∣ject his Words, John 12. 48. Because he speaketh and pu∣lisheth unto them right things. Nevertheless such wor as I have truly alledged from the Scriptures, will jud them at the last day. But whether they will hear or forbear, whether they w Read or not, these Scriptures of Truth are again laid b∣fore them, Now we know that God heareth not sinners; but any man be a worshipper of God, and doth his will, him  heareth, John 9. 31. Notwithstanding this is writt so plainly that every capacity may understand it, y nevertheless many Men and Women (Satan acting wi all deceivableness in them that perish) go on blindly a ignorantly for twenty, forty or sixty years, yea throug∣out all their life long in this deceit, of being Worshi∣pers of God and yet not doing his will, of hearing  word and not obeying it, nor yet doing thereafter; whe as the Blessedness is to them that hear the word of God a keep it. Saith David by the Spirit, if I regard iniqui in my heart the Lord will not hear me. Now iniqui signifies the thing that is not equal. But too many outwa Worshippers do not only regard iniquity in their hea but also practice it with their hand. Nevertheless li the Adulterous Woman, Who eateth and wipeth her mou and saith, I have done no wickedness, they will not cea∣nor desist to offer up their many and customary Pray∣s
unto God, as aforetime, and as if they had never one any such thing. Such may be found amongst the umber of those of whom it is written, Not every one at saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the king∣m of Heaven, but he that doth the will of my Father which  in Heaven. Many will say to me in that day, Lord, Lord, ave we not prophesied in thy name, and in thy name cast out evils: And then will I profess unto them, I never knew , depart from me ye that work iniquity. All will not be ved that go to Church or Meetings (and then where shall e ungodly and sinner appear?) for of four sorts of hearers  the word, there is but one that bringeth forth fruit to everlasting life. Herein also God is glorified when ey bring forth fruit, but he is not glorified when they  not bring forth fruit, or when instead of Bringing rth grapes, they bring forth wild grapes. o ye think that the Papists do glorifie God by their Mass  Idolatrous Worship, or by their ignorant mumbling er their Beads when it is the revealed will of God that eople should pray with the Spirit and with the under∣nding also, 1 Cor 14. 15. That whole Chapter is a∣inst praying in an unknown Tongue. God is a irit and they that worship him, must worship him in Spi∣t and in truth: This is opposite unto and shuts out all eir pompous outside Worship and carnal ordinances ter the institutions and Commandments of Men. For eir Worship stands in divers Washings and Bowings d carnal ordinances imposed on them, who would wil∣gly. always remain in their corruption and errour, d never let Reformation come among them; although  Blessed be God) many have reformed from their ays. Again, May it be thought that the Mahometans by going nstantly to their mosque, and by their making a great y and howling in their Prayers unto the God of Hea∣n, although they are never so earnest in Prayer as they em to be in tone and voice, and also by their Wa∣ings before Prayer as the manner of them is: where∣ common reason would shew them, that the inward urifying and cleansing of the heart of the Worshippers
is more required by God and more pleasing and accept∣able in his sight, then the outward washing of the Bodies with water. And so with all their other rites an ceremonies, customs and manners, do they glorifie God  when all the mean while they know not nor believ on Jesus Christ, by whom there is access unto the Fathe he being the alone mediator between God and Man. And so we may run over and conceive in our min as to all the Religions, Superstitions and ways of Wo∣ship used in the World, together with that manifo Errour and Absurdity that is joyn'd therewith. Do tho Worshippers glorifie God? It would be hard to say so For the Father seeketh such to worship him as worship him  Spirit and in Truth. And seeing that so much Errour a Folly, Ignorance and Vanity is crept in and intermin∣led with the several Worships of the World, especial among those of the Roman-Church, and that vast mult∣tude of others who do not at all name the name of Chr it may be thought as to them, that in God's Sight and  to his Acceptation, He that Sacrificeth a Lamb, is as if  ut off a Dogs neck. He that offereth an Oblation as if he ∣fer'd Swines blood. He that burneth Incense, as if he bless an Idol. Which last is the highest degree of provoki God that can be. So that such Worshippers do rath displease than please God, they do rather dishonour th glorifie him; They make God more angry and furth off then bring him near, or reconcile him unto the Wshippers. But to come home and nearer to our selves, even  us who are called Protestants of the pure Reform'd Chur who come yet nearer to the Pattern shew'd to us in  Gospel than they aforementioned. Altho' our Worship  in some measure Spiritual and True: Yet here agai a right Faith and a wrong Conversation, a good Na but evil Doings will not save any of us▪ Nor yet is G glorified by the work done, or only in the outward co∣ing to the Places of Worship, for if People do therein dr∣near to God with their Lips but their Hearts are far fr him, if they bring only their Bodies to the place but the in their Souls do mind other Objects besides the Invisib
od then as the Body without the Spirit is dead, so such may be ore truly called carcae Worship than Spiritual Wor∣ip; for it is the Worship of a dead Body only, or of a arcase without the Spirit Acting or being concern'd there∣. Saith God, Now let them put away their Whoredom, nd the Carcases of their Kings from me, and I will dwell in he midst of them for ever, Ezek. 43. 9, Lip labour in Pray∣r or Worship is properly Whordom, for it takes away he heart from God the right beloved, and places it n another wrong beloved, and so it is a carkase of Wor∣hip for the reason aforeassigned: Both which God requires o be put away before he will dwell in the midst of us. Having abundantly and at large discoursed, by what kind of Worship God is not glorified, it will easily ppear by what Worship he is indeed glorified. For if e is not glorified by meer outside Worship, as indeed he s not, it follows that he is glorified by such Wor∣ship as is spiritual (which denotes inward Worship, for if it is performed by the Spirit it must be inward, be∣cause the Spirit is within) and true. God is a Spirit, and they that worship him must worship him in Spirit and in truth: For the Father seeketh such to worship him, and consequently he is glorified thereby, so that, to Wor∣ship God in Spirit and in truth, is a part of our glori∣fying God here on Earth. Whoso offereth praise, glorifieth me, and to him that order∣eth his conversation aright, will I shew the Salvation of God, Pal, 50. 23. Seeing that they who order their conversation aright, will have the Salvation of God shewn unto them it follows hence also, that they who order their con∣versation aright, do glorifie God, for 'tis only those who glorifie God here on Earth, who can come unto him with comsortable expectation and assurance of seeing, yea of partaking his Salvation also. The words may be truly Read thus, whoso ordereth his conversation aright glori∣fieth me, as well as, whoso offereth praise, glorifieth me; for none in truth can offer up praise such as accept∣able with God but he that ordereth his conversation a∣right; for praise is not seemly in the mouth of a Sin∣ner, neither is God pleased with the sacrifice of foots.
But they that order their conversation aright, do bri praise and glory unto God, and therefore it is sutab for such only who have clean lips and obedient hearts  offer it up, according to what is written, Take with yo words and turn to the Lord, and say unto him, Take aw all iniquity and receive us graciously: So will we render t calves of our lips; which plainly shews forth that whe people are turned to the Lord and he takes away all iniqui then only they are meet and fit to offer up Prayer an Praises unto the most high God; and until that be don he will not receive them graciously. Now they orde their conversation aright, whose Conversation is as becom∣eth the Gospel of Christ, or whose conversation is ordered according to the whole written word of God, from which we are not to add nor diminish. In a word, they that fea God and keep his Commandments, these do glorifi him. In that day shall there be upon the bells of the Horses, Holi∣ness unto the Lord. So it should be written on the fore head of each of us, and it should be ingraved in the Table of our Hearts that it may be continually in our mind and remembrance, O Man or Woman, calling them by their several and respective names, thou art m Servant, in whom I the invisible God will be glorified  which should indeed engage us so to walk circumspectly and order our conversation aright so as in truth to glorifie God. From the things that have been spoken, now let the question be asked and put severally to the People o this generation, taking them one by one, How hath God been glorified in any of us throughout all the foregoing part of our Life? I am afraid that here we should be at a stand, and we could give but a poor and indifferent account as to that. Many people will not be able to make so good an answer as that of the unprofitable servant (who yet for all that was doomed to be cast into utter darkness) Lord, Thou hast thine own again. For they have not been only idle in the management thereof, but they have also wasted and consumed the Talent that was committed unto them. Yea, those who have
ade an addition and improvement thereon so as to have ined more Talents; yet still they have fallen short of that was the expectation of God and themselves yet ight have done more. For all (even they that believe entioned in the foregoing verse, yea the very best Ser∣ants of God in the several Generations and Countries s only Son Jesus Christ the Righteous excepted) Have ned and come short of the glory of God, Rom. 3. 23. ut however let the question be throughly put to our ouls, What fruit have we severally brought forth unto God? Bring forth fruits meet for Repentance, and so the Apostle writeth to the Colossians, The Gospel came unto u as it is in all the world, and bringeth forth fruit as so it doth in you. That is, it did make a sensible alter∣tion in their lives and manners, and it had an oper∣tion and working upon them; yea farther there was  visible appearance of it, for fruit is to be seen. Here again it must be acknowledged, that even the very best rimitive Christians, although they did bring forth me fruit, yet they did not bring forth so much and so ood fruits as the Gospel would have enabled them to ring forth, and themselves might have done. The fruits ere not answerable and equal unto what God might nd did look for and expect; which should teach and instruct us to be upon the bringing forth fruit and good works as much as ever we can. Herein is my Father orified that ye bear much fruit. (It is not said, fruit in∣efinitely, or only some fruit, but much fruit) So shall  be my Disciples. So that to bring forth fruits meet for epentance, or to bring forth fruits unto God by our Gospel conversation, is another part of our glorifying God here on Earth. It is what God looks for, Isa. 5. 4. and expects from s. For the Earth that drinketh in the Rain that cometh oft upon it, and bringeth forth herbs meet for them by whom  is dressed receiveth Blessing from God, but that which beareth thorns and Briars is rejected, and is nigh un∣to cursing, whose end is to be burned. The good Trees are known from the barren by the fruit which the one bring∣eth forth, and the other doth not. In like manner the
true Servants of God may be distinguished from the barren professors of the Gospel, for as these may be likened to such Trees only that have leaves on them, but as for the former sort By their fruits you shall know them. The first sort do shew out of a good conversation his works with meekness of wisdom; and the Gospel in them bringeth forth fruit, and bringeth forth herbs meet for whom it is dressed; so they bring forth fruits meet for him by whom they are dressed, and that is God; for by his Word and Spirit they are dressed. The word and spirit is like putting dung unto soil, so these do prune, dress and manure the hearts of people, and gather out the stones thereof, Isa. 5. 2. A stony heart will he take away and give them an heart of flesh, and all this is to bring forth fruits unto God, And as is aforesaid that Hypocritical outward Worshippers do rather dishonour than glorifie God: so do those professors who bring forth wild Grapes instead of Grapes; or who instead of being a Nobel vine and wholly a right seed, are of a sudden turned into a degenerate plant of a strange vine. So contrariwise when those who are indeed the Servants of the most high God, do indeed bring forth good grapes, and good fruits, such as in truth are becoming the Gos∣pel of Christ, these again do as much glorifie God as the other sort do dishonour him. This appears from that aforecited Scripture, Herein is my Father glorified that ye bear much fruit, so shall ye be my Disciples. Intimating there by that people may have the name of Christ's Disci∣ples, but they are not so indeed unless they bear much fruit. But this is yet more evident from the following Scripture, Let your light so shine before men that they may see your good works, and glorifie your Father which is in Hea∣ven. For the good works or good fruits of his Servants do occasion God to be glorified, that is to be well thought off, and well spoken off, and for praise and honour to be ascribed unto him. To pursue here the like reasoning which Moses doth in Deut. 4. 6. 7, 8. So in this case strangers and those people who as yet know not God, will be apt to think, and say, that God him∣self must be a very Good and Wise and Holy and
Beneficial a being, inasmuch as they see evidently with their eyes that such and such people who serve and mitate him are very Good and Wise and Holy, and nblameable in their conversation, and they do whatever good they can unto others. Said one of the Antients, This is true Religion to imitate him whom thou Worshippest. For to be Godly is to be like unto God, and to be like unto God is to be Godly. And so to do good is a true resemblance and likeness unto the God-Head in that He did good, giving us Rain from Heaven, and it is  likeness unto Christ also, who went about doing good. This doing good is a bearing fruit, and a bringing forth herbs meet for whom it is dressed. For the fruits of the Earth and Tree do nourish and delight us, the Corn feedeth us, the Barly is made serviceable to quench our hirst and gratifie the appetite, Wine makes glad the heart of Man, and oyl a chearful countenance, all which are good unto the Body, and the instance of God's doing good in Acts 14. 17. Is there assigned in Giving us Rain from Heaven and fruitfull seasons, filling our hearts with food and gladness. So that the more good any Man or Woman doth, the more he or she is like unto God and Christ. When thou seest and observest any one to do good more than ordinary and that same person seems to serve God very much this is an evidence that he doth it in sin∣cerity and reality, and that God doth indeed command and require him so to do, and also it is an endeavour after his likeness. The good works and good fruits which appear forth through any Man or Woman are the actings of God through his Creatures: For 'tis not so much they but Christ who dwelleth in them that doth this or that good thing; and therefore it is meet and right that God should have the Glory and Honour of it, Which causeth through us thanksgiving unto God, for the ad∣ministration of this service, not only supplieth the want of the Saints but is abundant also by many thanksgivings unto God, 2 Cor. 9. 11, 12, As indeed such people who are Spiritually knowing, when they see any good works, they do thereupon glorify our father which is in Heaven; for he is indeed the author and original of them, and
thus it comes to pass that through the instrument who visible, the invisible God is glorified thereby. The Heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmam sh his handy work. Even those Creatures which ha no Life nor Speech nor Language, yet by their having ha a Being from him, and Greatness or Beauty, they are stan∣ing Monuments of his Praise. Like as a Curious an well drawn Picture doth always shew forth the skill  the Painter, altho' it hath no Mouth to utter it fort Even so those great and wonderful Works of the Crea on of God do declare and shew forth the Glory, H∣nour and Power of God; and their Voice, tho' it is ∣lent and inward, is heard or rather understood wherev those wonderful Works of the Creation are seen. In th sense The Sun and Moon and Stars of Light and the H∣vens of Heavens do all praise God, as in Psal. 148. Th are called upon so to do, and they do it according In Ver. 5. the Reason is observable why they should  it, Let them praise the name of the Lord, for he command and they were Created. And so to come down to the lo∣er parts of the Creation, Praise the Lord from the Ea∣ye Dragons and all Deeps; Fire and Hail, Snow and Vapo Stormy wind fulfilling his Word, Mountains and  Hills, Fruitfull Trees and all Cedars, Beasts and all C∣tel, creeping things and flying Fowl. Ver. 8, 9, 10. Whi is the living Creation. And in the next Verse he com to the reasonable understanding Creation, Kings of  Earth and all People, Princes and all Judges of the Ear both young Men and Maidens, Old Men and Childre let them praise the Name of the Lord; for his Name alo is excellent, his Glory is above the Earth and Heaven. He some are sullen and unthankful, and do it no more tha according to outward Form; but they do it not in the common Discourse. As to this matter the Holy Gho Exhorts on this wise. By him therefore let us offer the S∣crifice of Praise to God continually; that is, the fruit of  lips, giving thanks to his Name. Observe that Adver Continually; for it is not said, only in the Congregati∣on, or at no time but when we are saying our Prayer but continually, which extends to our common talk an
scourse. Observe here again, how it is called the fruit  our Lips. Intimating hereby, that offering up of Praise d giving thanks unto God is the proper fruit of our Lips.  that if our Lips do not yield and bring forth this uit, they are as barren Trees fit for the fire, and not r our Master's use. We have very often in Scriptures, which make known e mind of the Lord, Glory and Honour and Praise Asibed unto him. Now indeed God doth not at all want lory, no more than the Sun doth want Light, for with ee is the fountain of Life: so with him is the fountain  all Glory and Excellency, and from him is derived wn whatever Glory and Excellency is in any of the reatures. He is infinitely happy and allsufficient in imself, he doth not want the services of Angels, much ss of sinful Men. If thou be Righteous what givest thou him?  what receiveth he of thine hand? or is it gain that thou akest thy way perfect? all which imply a strong Negative hat it is not so. But yet if God had never Created a∣y thing, there would not have been any thing to have iven up and ascribe Glory unto him, nor yet to Cele∣rate his Name (For the Grave cannot praise thee, Death annot celebrate thee, and so a state of Annihilation can∣ot do it) But now since he hath created all things for is Pleasure, and to receive Glory from them, this thing of Glory is the best and most proper thing which the Rea∣onable Inhabitants of the Earth can conceive of to as∣ribe up unto God. Give unto the Lord the glory due unto is Name, Psal. 29. 2. So that it is a just debt. It is therefore accordingly given and rendred up unto him by ll his Saints and Servants throughout the Earth, Give hanks unto the Lord, call upon his name, Make known his eeds among the people, sing unto him, sing Psalms unto him alk you of all his wondrous works, glory ye in his holy name, e ye mindful always of his covenant, shew forth from day to day his Salvation, declare his glory among the Heathen, is marvellous works among all Nations; for great is the Lord and greatly to be paised, he also is to be feared above all Gods, glory and honour are in his presence, strength and glad∣ness are in his place, give unto the Lord ye kindreds of the
people glory and strength. (Now there is no giving of streng to him that is Almighty already, but it is only  speak out that he is so) Give unto the Lord the glory d unto his name, 1 Chron. 16. In short it is to acknowled and speak out of the glory of God, and to give than and praise to his Holy Name. Provided always th this be done by those who have their conversation ord∣ed aright, who are of clean lips and obedient heart for therefore it is that those cautionary expressions are he necessarily intermingled and incerted in this song of prai Be ye mindful always of his Covenant, he is also to be fear above all Gods; intimating thereby, that unless people a also mindfull of his Covenant and fear God above a other things, they cannot then give thanks unto t Lord, nor yet sing Psalms unto him, nor declare  glory, nor yet praise him, so as for God to be please therewith and accept thereof. If we fear any thing ∣bove God, that is our God also, O Lord our God, oth Lords besides thee have had dominion over us; but by th only will we make mention of thy name. It is written of Abraham, Who against hope believed  hope, that he might become the father of many nations, ∣cording to that which was spoken, so shall thy seed be. A being not weak in faith he considered not his own body no dead when he was about an hundred years old, neither y the deadness of Sarah's womb, he staggered not at the prom of God through unbelief, but was strong in faith giving glo unto God, and being fully perswaded that what he had prom∣sed he was able also to perform. From all which ma be gathered, that to firmly believe and be fully pe∣swaded, that such a thing shall come to pass, althoug according to humane reason it is unlikely to come  pass, provided always that we have the word and pro∣mise of God for it, as here Abraham had; this also  a giving glory unto God, when the thing seems impos∣sible according to the course of Nature (as it was in th instance here given) Yet here to believe that God both ca and also will perform the same, this is a Giving glory unto God; for it gives God the glory of his truth and the glory of his Almighty power.
This thing if it be rightly and throughly understood,  Mystery both to the people of the World, and also  the outward Worshippers; for as to them at this day en Moses is read, and so it is when the Gospel of Christ ead, The vail is upon their Hearts. The written word  God and the manner of the Dispensation of his gdom towards us, is a Mystery. It is given unto  (those of the Discipleship) to know the mysteries of the ngdom of Heaven, Mat. 13. 11. The mystery of God should nished as he hath declared to his servants the prophets . 10. 7. But that part of this mystery which I would  just mention is, that although all Scripture was given nspiration of God and is true and will be fulfilled to ry tittle thereof, yea the Truth and Power and Hono∣ of God do all stand engaged to fulfill all and every t of this same word; and God himself hath born ness to it both with signs and wonders and with divers acles and gifts of the Holy Ghost according to his own . So that we ought to believe it all to be true, and t it shall all be fulfilled or we make God a liar: if  believe not the Record which God gave of his Son, o saith Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but my ds shall not pass away. Yet still God being willing to ve and exercise the faith of his Servants, and also the mixt multitude of people concerning it, hath so ered and suffered it to come to pass (Behold herein  Wisdom and Mystery of God) that some things ich this his word of truth speaks of, should seem e falsified. They are not falsified indeed, but only y seem to be so on set purpose to prove to the ut∣st degree the faith of people herein. If they do re∣ their faith therein nevertheless, then it is a giving ry unto God. But if an evil heart of unbelief is in m, like Cleopas and those with him, who said, we sted it had been he which should have Redeemed Israel,  seeing and hearing of his miracles in his life time.  when he was put to death like a malefactor, than  their hopes were blasted, their faith withered, and ny might probably say, it is all come to nothing: is and the like is not a giving glory unto God.
And so a root of unbelief springs up in the hea many, whereby they are defiled. For there are in  last days many infidels in heart who say, Where i promise of his coming, for since the Fathers fell asl things continue as they were since the beginning of the ∣tion. And so there are many, who although they profess Christianity, partly to conform to the fa and custom of the Country they live in, or for se ends, or to provide for and against the doubtful uncert if they be of the more considering sort; yet they d the main disbeleive the truth of Revealed Religion But all these do err, not knowing the Scripture; and p of God, nor yet the way and manner of the dispen on of his Kingdom towards us Men, for they do know throughly how that God doth prove the fai Mankind, all one as the manners of Mankind. As he prove them to know what is in their heart, whether they keep his Commandments or no, Deut. 8. 2. So he  Hide his face from them to see what their end shall be they are a very froward generation, Children in whom  faith, Deut. 32. 20. So he doth prove them likewise, whi they will give any credence to his word which saith shall be so; but in the mean while God orders and fers it to be so on set purpose, that seemingly con and unexpected events happen and fall out: So th meer natural Man would be apt to think and say, it never be so as the word and promise of God sai shall be. Examples hereof are common in Scripture. So it in the case of Abraham to whom Jsaac was prom in his old Age, that Sarah his Wife laughed at the likelihood thereof, for which she received a check reproof from the Angel who brought the messag any thing too hard for the Lord? And so it wa to the promise of God increasing his seed, and b ing them into the Land of Canaan, when they we danger to be murdere and destroyed in their birth in pt, and afterwards when they were pursued by Ph and his Host, and were in peril to be all drowne the Red Sea, and then many of their carkases fell in
ilderness. Yet for all these seemingly contrary events od did at length perform and fulfill all his words hich he had spoken unto Abraham. Throughout the hty ninth Psalm, are recited up many particular cove∣nts and promises which God made to David and his ed. And therein also is summed up a seeming breach d failure of all those several Covenants and Promises, that one might be tempted to think, how could vid believe God for all these? For even himself did  out, Lord, where are thy former loving kindnesses ch thou swarest unto David in thy truth? Remember, d, the reproach of thy Servants, and how I do bear in  bosom the reproach of all the mighty people, wherewith thine mies have reproached, O Lord, wherewith they have slander∣ the footsteps of thine anointed. Intimating thereby, that  enemies of the Lord were apt to reproach and ob∣ unto his Servants, How was he a God of truth he did fail so in his promises which he had sworn to David in his truth? And how was he a good God e did not continue all his former loving kindnesses? twithstanding this reproach of his enemies, Yet David  all this was satisfied in his heart; yea and he did be∣e that God would perform all his Covenant which  hath done since, he is now a doing, and will form unto his seed for evermore. Thus much may be hered from that form of praise wherewith that whole m is concluded, Blessed be the Lord for evermore, A∣ and Amen. A double Ratification thereof, and ch is as much as if David was resolved to bless God , let his enemies reproach and say what they would. nother Instance hereof we have in the same David,  when it was told unto him by Samuel, How that  day he should be King over all Israel, he did after∣ds so distrust and dis-believe it, because of the then kelihood thereof, as to say in his haste all men are Liars; ch must extend also even to Samuel the Prophet of the d. Again, when he saith, My soul fainteth for thy Sal∣on, but I hope in thy word. Mine eyes fail for thy Salvation  for the word of thy Righteousness, Psal. 119. 81. . By Phrasing it on this wise it seems as if God did ay or neglect to perform his Word, and bring about
his Salvation; and yet for all this the Man after Go own Heart did hope in his Word. Again the Prop Jeremiah saith boldly unto God, Wilt thou altogether m me a liar unto this People, and as Waters that fail?  had sent him to foretell the Jews capitivity, but a he had made known this his message, the people  not give so much heed and belief to it as they shou and partly through the delay of time between,  also the prophet himself saw no great outward like li thereof, that he cryed out on this wise. But at le The Lord hath done that which he had devised, he hath ful his word that he had commanded in the days of old,  2. 17. Not to multiply many more instances of this k after that Christ had foretold, When ye shall see Je lem compassed with armies, then know that the deso thereof draweth nigh, Luke 21. 20. It was so long fore that was throughly fulfilled, even forty years  Christ's death, that many were apt to say in their h in the mean while, Where is the promise of his co yea when Titus Vespatian first invested Jerusalem wit Armies, he went off again: So that this word seem to be falsified, but it was not falsified,  came on a second time, and than was accomp the total and entire desolation thereof. We ought as firmly to believe that all Scriptu true as that there is a God, or that Jesus Christ  Saviour of Mankind; for if we believe that God  his visible works of Creation do declare, then w to believe also that this God is true, and than o quently that all Scripture is true, seeing that all pture is given by inspiration of God. And al perhaps at first we may not know how to reconci truth of several parts and places of Scripture with common and daily events of the world, or wit lives and manners of the people, yet this is our  ance and infirmity; for if we did seek out of the B the Lord and read, and if we did understand throu we should find and perceive that whatsoever is  done on the Earth by all and the several Inhab
eof, It is all but a fulfilling of the ame word, and gs do so and so come to pass that the Scriptures t be fulfilled, Acts 3, 18. And those things that God  aforeshewed by the mouth of all his Prophets, by st and his Apostles, He hath so fulfilled, is at this day ulfilling, and he will fulfill to the end of time, as  greater things are yet to come, and as yet to be ful∣d. And whereas it is so ordered of set purpose by alwise God, that several things happen out ch seem perplex and hard to be understood, this is to e our faith therein; and if we hold out and retain  faith nevertheless, then it is a giving glory unto God. e have his word and promise for it, then the more  believe in hope against hope, it is yet the more giving  unto God. For if in things to be believed, there was  manner of doubt or unlikelihood, what reward hath To be strong in faith doth glorifie God. So on the contrary elief doth dishonour him; wherefore take heed of un∣ef; which notwithstanding the outward profession he Gospel is very common amongst Men. There is ot of unbelief growing in the hearts of unregene∣ people; and there is also a mixture, or rather a tin∣e thereof in the hearts of the Regenerate. Sometimes  in them are little questionings within themselves ther these things are so, and sometimes little bts that they are not; which cometh to pass, because the little likelihood that sometimes appears in the n while, that they ever will be so, which is to prove  faith. s to obey God and keep his Commandments is to ifie him. So to believe on him and his word is to ifie him likewise. The several acts of faith do give y unto God: yea, when we believe his word, altho∣ it seems against common reason and the outward ability of things in the mean while; yet here still believe and be fully perswaded, that for all this there ll be yet an expected end, this is to be strong in th, and to give so much the more glory unto God. We may learn another kind of glorifying God from that soning of our Saviour Jesus Christ, For if ye love them
that love you, what reward have ye? Do not even the Pu cans the same? And if ye salute your brethren only,  do ye more than others, do not even the Publicans so? And  that reasoning of the Apostle, For this is thank wor if a man for conscience towards God endure grief, suffer wrongfully. For what glory is it if when ye be buffeted for  faults ye take it patiently, but if when ye do well and  fer for it, this is acceptable with God. If ye be reproached for name of Christ, happy are ye; for the spirit of Glory and God resteth upon you, on their part he is evil spoken of,  on your part he is glorified. From all this may be un∣derstood that to do those things which are not comm∣ly done by other Men, or what is more than other  will do, or to submit our selves to present pain  inconveniency when we do not deserve it, but  wrongfully inflicted on us, provided always that  happens to us as we are in a way of duty and  for our obedience unto the Commandments of  then indeed this and the like is a glorifying of G. This of suffering wrongfully, or to suffer when we do well a kind of taking up the Cross, and it is a going  and contrary to our Natural inclinations; which as forementioned is an instance of glorifying God. W doth not only consist in the bare pain and inconvenie that the poor Creature endures (He doth not afflict  lingly nor grieve the Children of men) But it is in the do of and obedience unto the Commandments of G. That is, when I had rather meet with trouble and irks∣ness to my Fleshly Nature, as I am in the service the Lord God, then avoid the same trouble or irkso∣ness by my neglecting and not doing of it. For annexing of Trouble, Pain, Loss or Inconvenie which we sometimes meet with in our performing  keeping of them, God doth hereby the more effectu prove Mankind to know what is in their heart whi they will keep his Commandments or no. For to me on here a like Reasoning to that of our Saviour  Christ, if in keeping the Commandments of God it  all Smoothness and Ease and Pleasure and Agreeable to our Nature, what reward have ye? Do not even ∣licans
and Sinners of their owns they manage and  ease and pleasure, and what is it, but herein they  gratifying the Flesh? And how wo an a Liar. For g more than others, for do not even thice concern∣ all Mankind so? And consequently what his Reli∣ven unto God by such a kind of life? or to do  it is gs as these; for even Beasts do those things which by n∣ure and Sense they are led unto. But to do things e the common level of Mankind, or to Do more then s, as in enduring grief, suffering wrongfully, when is is in keeping and doing the Commandments of  and the like, is a giving glory unto God. the several things which have been afore spoken, may be instructed how we may glorify God here on . It must be in keeping of and doing the Com∣dments of God; for otherwise instead of vainly and  thinking to glorify him, it may be said to us at the  Who hath required these things at your hands? But if o indeed glorify God here on Earth, according to directions and intimations aforegiven, then (which ld quicken, stir up and actually perswade us to in∣ly and constantly set about the glorifying God here  Earth) It will be a most comfortable review and ing back to each of us, just as we are going off from stage of this Earth, if we have the Testimony of Conscience according to truth that we have glori∣ God on the Earth, or that any Glory, Honour and se hath been given and ascribed unto God through y means of any of us. Hath thy Life and conver∣n and thy Deeds done in the Body, and so have mine fied God our Creator? By having been so ordered managed by us, that when Men did see our good s, our Faith, Obedience and Patience, they did eason of them Glorify our Father which is in Heaven. mine and Prove your selves herein, Hast thou and thou, and so do ye ask your selves, Have I and have rified God at all in my past life? And according he answer of your several consciences are, if some ou have done it a little, others perhaps of ye have done it at all, but certainly none of ye have done it
so much as ye might have done it, nor yet so muc such of you who are enlightened and Spiritually  derstanding do wish that ye had done. In the nam God then and for his Glory, do it more for the tim come during the few and evil days remaining of  several Pilgrimages here on Earth. As ye have been  Instructed from the Scriptures of truth, how ye  to walk and glorify God, We beseech you Brethren exhort you by the Lord Jesus Christ, that ye would abound  in more and more. For this will be indeed a C Consolation to ye severally when ye come to tast  bitterness of Death; it will be as so much Wine mi with that Gall, if ye can towards the shutting up of  days, make this appeal in truth unto God and Sing Song (for it is all rejoycing and comfort) as Christ forerunner, the First born amongst many Brethren did,  herein also left us an ensample that we should f his steps, I have glorified thee on the Earth, I have f the work which thou gavest me to do. Proceed we now to handle these last words, I have finished the work which thou gavest me to do This Work in the general is the Working out of our Stion; which or the thing signified thereby is often  Scripture called a work. Now the Scripture speak and according to truth; for it was given by intion of God who is alwise and alknowing, and for  it is impossible to lie. From hence it may be pable to observe, how that the multitude of people and ward Worshippers go upon a gross Errour and mi which is very dangerous, hereby Satan acting wi deceivableness in them that perish; for they thin practice accordingly, as if Religion and the servi God (through which people are to save their Souls  get to Heaven) was no Work, but only a customa side thing, which they make not much more of th cording to form and fashion, talk and discourse,  a thing which they have been bred up and used unto themselves observe it accordingly, for they impl
rk or labour therein, and as they manage and der the matter they find none in it, but herein they eatly err, Let God be true and every Man a Liar. For wever most people apprehend and practice concern∣g it, yet that Man, who will be saved by his Reli∣on, must make a work of it, yea and hard work it is  climb up the Holy Hill and to get to Heaven. In∣ed too many do not take more Labour and Pains in eir Religion than in putting on their Cloaths, and  dressing and undressing themselves, which is a custom- usual thing, but there is no toil or sweat therein:  more do they make of their outward Worship. But s alone is not sufficient to obtain the benefit and sired end of Religion, that is, the Salvation of their uls. For the Scripture which makes wise to Salvation and aches the way to Heaven, doth assure us that we must ive if we would enter in at the strait gate, Luke 13. 24. The ord in the original signifies Putting forth the utmost rength which meer outward Worshippers do not. God is a warder of them that diligently seek him, Heb. 11. 6. Which plyes on the other hand, that he is not a Rewarder  them who seek him carelesly, or who do it only accor∣ing to custom and outward fashion, as the manner of any is. Be ye stedfast, unmoveable always abounding in the ork of the Lord, forasmuch as ye know that your labour is t in vain in the Lord 1 Cor. 15. 48. In this Scripture it is lled both a Work and a Labour, and it imports thus uch, that they who make a Labour and work of it,  them it will not be labour in vain. As again on the ther hand, to such who make no work nor labour there∣f, it will be labour in vain: I mean that little which uch people do in Religion (for almost all people do some∣hat or other therein) will be in vain because it will ot be sufficient to obtain the desired end, which is the aving of their Souls. There is no going to Heaven by afe and sloth, by custom or fashion. Son, Go and ork in my Vineyard. But thou endure hardship as a good Souldier of Jesus Christ. And not to multiply more Scri∣ptures to confirm the point in hand, take it for a certain ruth and affirmation as the end of things will more clear∣ly
shew and manifest, That it is a hard work and Labour to serve God accceptably with reverence and Godly fear, and to be Religious indeed that it may become a Religion to the saving of the Soul, as people do really work and labour when in the sweat of their face they eat their Bread, or as it is in any hard labour of the hands; and this must be a continued work and labour in Religion extending and running throughout all our Life long. The labour and work of the mind is as toilsome and difficult as that of the Body. Now the work of Righteousness (for so the Holy Ghost calleth it, Isa, 32. 17.) Or the labour of Religion or the service of God, is purely and chiefly of the mind; it is heart work and Soul work, and so it is labour of the Heart and labour of the Soul. And here Bodily exercise profiteth nothing, but the Soul execise, that is, the lifting up her self towards God, and that most earnest desire which she hath to please him and find acceptance with him, hath the promise of that life which is to come: And here must be labour and care that thi may be accepted with God. In Bodily exercise pertai∣ning to Religion there is but little labour or work, but in the Soul exercise thereof, (which is the principal part and the only thing required by God, My Son give me thy Heart) There must be labour and work to render it acceptable and pleasing in the sight of the Lord. A for instance, when we go to Worship, to bring our Bodies to the place, or after we are come there to sit still and sleep, or to have our thoughts a Wandering and Roving, or to have our eyes staring and fixed on the several out∣ward objects, there is not much work and labour in all this. For in the bare going to the place of Worship there is no more labour than in Going or Walking to a place for our Recreation or Pleasure; and then it is no more labour and work in sitting still there, then in the Houses of our several Habitations. But herein consists the labour and work of the Soul, to keep it always lifted up and fixed on the invisible God, and to keep it close and attentive to the word preached; or when the Law and the Prophets Acts 13. 15. The Gospel and Apostles art Read, than to mind only the things which are therein spoken
of and nothing else. And when the vanity and inclina∣tion of our corrupt Nature, (this being also one device of Satan that the word preached becomes as seed sown in ony ground, for it hath not entrance into and takes o root in the heart) would turn us aside to stare upon tward objects; Here again to deny our selves and ith Hezekiah to Turn our face towards the wall, that we ay be the more attentive and earnest in our Prayer un∣ God, and in hearing his word; there is some work and bour in this before we can bring our corrupt and de∣tfull heart throughly unto it. O turn away mine eyes at they behold not Vanity. And when the Worship of od and the hearing his word, is Irksome and Weari∣me to our corrupt Nature, (which is the great tempta∣on to ungodliness and prevails upon people of un∣dly minds) And we could spend the same tune in car∣l Perambulation in the fields, In finding our own leasure, or speaking our own words, at the doors or in the oms of our Houses, both which the Spirit of God finds ult with in Isa. 58. 13. Ezek, 33. 30. Yet here again  deny our selves of this kind of pleasure and agreeable∣ess to our Nature as it is corrupt, and willingly submit r selves at the same time to the Tediousness and Irksom∣ss of Religious duties, there is some labour and work erein, for it is of the same Nature as labour is to be Toil∣me and Irksome, for no Labour (which was inflicted  us as a chastening and punishment after the fall) for the resent seemeth to be joyous but grievous; nevertheless terward it Yieldeth the peaceable fruit of Righteousness  them who are exercised thereby: For afterwards the Crea∣ure is inwardly satisfied because he hath herein complied ith the ordinance of God, and also herein he hath sub∣itted to some part of the punishment of God, which  now sweetned unto us in Christ, In the sweat of thy ce shalt thou eat thy Bread. By the sweetness and comfort hich both is intermixed with and amidst honest labour, nd chiefly it may be perceived after it is over; for there  no such satisfaction in the world like unto the review  looking back upon well spent time, the reasonable
Creature may cry out, Righteous art thou O Lord,  thou hast punished us less than our iniquities deser Herein also the Plowman, Artificer and day Labour will give up unto God a better account of spending th time and the days of their life then idle Gentry a Rich People, Who have lived in pleasure on the Earth, a have been wanton and have nourished their hearts as in  day of slaughter, Who sit down to eat and to drink and rise up to play. Here again it is to be desired that peop would willingly as out of duty and obedience to th primitive Commandment and ordinance of God, su mit themselves to labour and pains and not do it so mu out of necessity to get a livelihood; and that they wou submit themselves to the same labour and pains in t immediate service of God and in doing good, and  all this purely for God's sake, and not as an hireling  hire or reward. For God more approves of such se vice and obedience as we may gather from what written, The Kings came and fought, then fought the Kin of Canaan in Taanach by the waters of Megiddo, they  no gain of mony, Judges 5. 19. And from the example Nehemiah who saith, Moreover from the time I was appoin to be their Governour in the land of Judah, that is, twe years I and my Brethren have not eaten the bread of  Governour, but the former Governours that had been befo me, were chargeable unto the people and had taken of them Bre and Wine, beside forty shekels of Silver, yea, even their serva bare Rule over the People: But so did not I because of  fear of God Neh. 5. 14, 15. These things are recorded to for ensamples, and they are written for our admon tion, yea and imitation also upon whom the ends  the world are come. The God of Israel said, He th Ruleth over Men, must be just, Ruling in the fear of G 2 Sam. 23. 3. Such should not be chargeable unto the peop For whereas the former Governours had been chargeab unto the people, Nehemiah would not, because of the fear God. But to return again from whence I have seemed to dig e, As bodily labour doth by use and exercise become mo
Habitual and easy, so in the service of and obedience to God it would be work and labour well bestowed to somewhat remove and take off that Irksomness and Wearisomness that is in the same, which is done by be∣ginning and then continuing in this good kind of life. Hereby it comes to pass that when people in their unre∣generate state say of the Worship and service of God, Behold what a weariness is it? Mal, 1. 13. Saying when will the new Moon be gone that we may sell Corn, and the Sabbath that we may set forth Wheat, Amos 8. 5. They come o be so changed and renewed and altered in their mind, that they call the Sabbath a delight, not doing their own ways, nor find their own pleasure, nor speak their own words; but they delight themselves in the Lord, and take delight in approaching unto God. Which heretofore was unpleasant o them and they were backward and hard to be brought unto it, this is a change indeed. Formerly they grudged at every hour of time which was not spent in pleasure, and now they grudge at every hour which is not spent in the service of God and doing good to their immor∣tal Souls. All other things perish and nothing else remains n a Man, or avails any thing. The Grass withereth, the Flower fadeth, but the word of our God shall stand for ever. There must be work and labour and succession of time, before the Soul comes to be thus Born again and rene∣wed in the Spirit of her mind, after that she hath been depraved by the Body, and by our corrupt sinful and sinning Nature. There must be a great deal of hard work and labour, before we can put off and be delivered from this Body of Sin and Death, which we carry con∣tinually about us. O wretched Man that I am, who shall deliver me from the Body of this Death? I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord. Intimating thereby, that no Mortal Creature could do it, yet the grace of Jesus Christ could and also would do it, for this purges out the old leaven and sinful and corrupt Nature until it becomes whole and healthful, and than it will grow up to Blessed immortality. There must be work and labour to lay aside every weight (for can any weight be laid aside without some labour? in no wise) And the sin which doth so easily
beset us, and to resist unto Blood striving against sin. T last requires the utmost labour and hardship. To go farther and lay the Ax to the Root of the Tree, th must be work and labour to get rid off and free fr the motions of Sin and the inclinations to Evil wh are in our members. For when we were in the flesh,  motions of sin which were by the law, did work in our me ers to bring forth fruit unto Death. This is the mis evous effect of those motions of sins in our members,  bring forth fruit unto Death. It may be of edificati and benefit to narrowly consider the Nature of th which also will not be altogether going aside from  intended matter; for to get clear from those motions sins, is one part of finishing that work which God ga us to do. They are called the motions of sins: So that they a not properly actual sins, but the motions of sins; that  a motion or inclination unto sin, like to the first sprin ing forth of a Bud, or as in the breaking forth into a S or Sore: The matter and root and cause thereof from within. So here the Law of God is perfect convert the Soul; and in order to that it would prevent the ve first rise and beginnings of sin, or the motions of sins in  members. For it doth not only provide against the outwa breaking forth of actual transgression, but also it wou suppress and stifle and hinder the motions of sins in o members. If these little ones, that is, the motions  sins in our members are dashed against the stones (as hap py is he that doth so) Then they can never grow in Presumptuous sins, or into the great transgression. And  if these motions of sins are suppressed and stifled whi they are but yet working in our members, than it  impossible that ever they should come forth into actua sins. Truly this to do is very hard work and labou yet still there should be a pressing and endeavour afte it. This is the difference between the sins of the regener∣ate and unregenerate, between the spot of thy Children, and which is indeed Corrupting of themselves, Deut 32. 5 Such as are the Children of God have only some little moti∣ons
and inclinations to the same sins, which they suffer to go and proceed no farther, not to bring forth fruit unto Death, as they would if they were not hindred and restrained, and if care was not taken against them. For when lust hath conceived, it bringeth forth sin, and sin when it is finished bringeth forth Death. But in unrege∣nerate people these motions of sins do break forth into outward act, and Lust in them goes forward and con∣ceives and brings forth sin, and sin in them is finished and bringeth forth Death, and involves them into ruin of Body and destruction of Soul. As for instance in, the Regenerate it is concupiscence, or a little inward Lust, which they are sure to let go no farther; but in the Unregenerate, the same concupiscence issues forth into Lasciviousness Uncleanness, Fornication and Adultery. Even in the Regenerate concupiscence is sin, this being one kind of those motions of sins the Apostle speaks of  Rom. 7. And it is one on those secret faults which David Psal. 19. 12. Prayes to be cleansed from, and also one of ose Secret sins which God doth set in the light of his countena∣e, and which he will bring into Judgement. Do ye think at the Scripture saith in vain, the Spirit that dwelleth in , lusteth to envy? the Apostle speaks in behalf of him∣self and of the other Regenerate, for in truth there are en in them Lustings and tendencies to envy and hatred hich in Unconverted people do break forth into actual nvy and Hatred. And so there is likewise in the Re∣nerate motions and inclinations lustings and tend∣cies to almost all manner of sin and evil, to glutto∣ and drunkenness, a longing after the Fleshpots of Aegy∣ and a secret inward liking of them by the fleshly cor∣pt Nature and by the old Man; but still and along ey prevent that they do not come forth into the seve∣l acts of Sin, to which again way is given by sinners d the Children of disobedience. Nevertheless it is the will of God (and accordingly s word which is very pure, doth direct it so) That his hildren and Servants should strive and sincerely en∣eavour what they can (Cursed is he that doth the work of e Lord deceitfully) Against all these motions of sins that
are in our members, and against these inclinations evil, and against the inward lusting and tendency transgression. The Commandment of God is not only this wise, Cease to evil, but extends farther, Abstain fr all appearance of evil: Which takes in all the occasio beginnings, enticements and tendencies to evil.  as he which hath called you is Holy, so be ye Holy all manner of conversation. Now there being in God motions to sin, nor inclinations to evil, it being Im sible for God to lye, or to commit sin or evil, it follows certain consequence that we can never obey and  fil this his Commandment of being Holy as he is Holy,  we get utterly rid off and clear from these motions sins and inclinations to evil; and yet we should whatever we can that we may partake of his Holines we would partake of his blessedness, for without Holi no Man shall see the Lord. Again it is Commanded, Stand in aw and sin not.  the word of God doth not rest there, as only to pro against the outward act of sin, but it goes yet far Mortifie therefore your members that are upon the Earth.  if the members are mortified upon the Earth, then there no motions of sins in these members; according to  other Scriptures witness. If Christ be in you, than i Body dead because of sin, or as to sin. Now again  certain that in a dead Body there are no motions of  at all, and it being the will of God that Christ  be formed in us, Little Children of whom I travail in  till Christ be formed in you. And except Christ be in y are reprobates; it follows therefore that we should be  as to sin, and then also we should have no motions sins in us, in which sence also it is that the Apostle  I dye daily. That is, he did dye daily unto sin: He not only cease from the outward act of sin, but also had less and less motion and inclination to sin, unt length he had no motion nor inclination to it at which is like dying continually, untill one is actu dead: For as than life goes away, and lessens by li and little, so in such not only the acts, but the ha
bit also, yea the Life and Power of Sin goeth and isheth away, until it becomes none at all. This is be diligent (that is, by still labouring and endeavour∣ after it, until we attain it, That we may be found m in peace without spot and blameless, 2 Pet. 3. 14. God  his people in Hosea, 8. 5. How long will it be ere they in to innocency? Which though it be long and he ex∣s much before they arrive unto it, yet at length e of his Peculiar people, Redeemed from all iniquity, after much labour and endeavour first had and used rds it, attain to that measure and degree of in∣ncy till they become Israelites indeed in whom is no ; and they arrive unto that state in this life, (for ven must be begun here, though it be perfected and ummated hereafter) to which God shall add and annex he highest Heavens, that in their mouth was found no , for they are without fault before the Throne of God.  die unto sin and to be alive again unto God; to ur after, till we actually attain unto Holiness and cency of Life, is one main part of doing and fini∣ that work which God sent us on this Earth to do. subdue the Power and Acts, yea the very motions inclinations to sin, and to root out utterly (as far possible) the corrupt Nature For flesh and blood shall not it the Kingdom of God, neither shall in any wise enter in any thing that defileth. As aforesaid, Heaven must egun here in us, if we will enter into Heaven here∣. And in order to that, this is our business and  which God sent us on this Earth for to do, By ing together with his grace, to labour and endeavour ever we can, that we may become meet to be par∣ of the inheritance of the Saints in light. His word therefore given to Build us up and give us an inheri∣ amongst all them which are sanctified, and to make  a people prepared for the Lord. This work we are o and finish. By the help of the same word, our s are to become ready, a people prepared for ord. And while they went to buy the Bridegroom came they that were ready, (Observe that) went in with him  marriage and the door was shut. We are to be ready
and prepared against what time God shall call a summon us to appear before himself. Like as the s of the Earth grow on till they become ripe and fit their Masters use. So it is accordingly expected  us, that we work together with his Grace and Sp which would work in us mightily, if we do not rebel  vex his Holy Spirit that we may become meet, re prepared, fit and ripe for God the great proprietou our Souls, who gathereth them up to himself: He b the Father of Spirits, and accordingly the faithful speak, Into thine hand I commit my Spirit. That they  become also, when our Bodies drop into the grave, shock of Corn in its season. That when it is slipt  dislodged from the Body, it may be such as himself spe of, Behold mine Elect in whom my Soul delighteth,  42. 1. Or which is to the same benefit or significat for the Lord Jesus who is the Son of God to say,  ye Blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for from the foundation of the World. What comfortable w are here? We would unless we be such fools as not to k the worth thereof, give Thousands of Rams and ten T sand Rivers of oyl, yea all we have in the world for assurance thereof. But though Rich people have the vantage as to this world, they have none as to the w to come; for the corruptible things of Gold and S (We were not Redeemed by these, but by the precious Blood of Lamb of God) will not purchase Heaven nor yet pr the favour of God: Which is to be had by no  way, then that of Obedience and Holiness. Obey my  and live. An Holy God loves an Holy Soul. For th fore it was that God speaks this of Jesus Christ, Behold Servant whom I uphold, Mine elect in whom my Soul del eth. Because he than knew from the beginning  his Son Jesus Christ would finish the work that God  him to do, as Christ makes the return thereof th had finished it. Wherefore when he cometh into world he saith, Sacrifice and offering thou wouldst not, a Body hast thou prepared me: In burnt offerings and S fices for Sin, thou hast had no pleasure. than said I, Lo  (In the volume of the Book it is written of me) T
will O God. From which and many other places of pture it may be truly Reasoned, that God hath not much pleasure in outward acts of Worship, nei∣r doth he so much insist upon and require them (I  not reprove thee for thy Sacrifices, or thy burnt offerings, have been continually before me) as in the doing his will. is is the chief thing which God requires of Man. Hath  Lord as great delight in burnt offerings and Sacri∣ as in obeying the voice of the Lord? Behold, to obey is r than Sacrifice, and to hearken than the fat of Rams. ow this is true Christianity to imitate Christ. For as was the first Born amongst many Brethren, so he self saith, I have given you an example that you should  I have done. Seeing therefore that Christ did all which  his Father sent him about, and finished his work  did his will: So we ought also severally as we his Creatures, but more especially as we profess our es to be the Servants of God (For his Servants shall e him) Do all which he sends us about on this Earth,  finish his Work and do his Will all the days of our  For 'tis not sufficient to be good or godly for a sea∣; but the promise is, To them who by patient continu∣ in well doing, seek for Glory and Honour and Immorta∣ Eternal Life; that towards the end of this present  we may also make the like comfortable return unto , I have finished the work which thou gavest me to do;  the other Blessed consequent may be also, And now  I to thee. o him that shall hear or Read these lines, the word exhortation saith, Go thou and do likewise. Be upon  and finishing the work which God gave thee on  Earth for to do and finish. For if this should be ected, Wo unto us for the day goeth away, for the shadows he Evening are stretched out. Thou nor yet I know  little sand there is the Glass of our life as yet to  out, A great deal of our life is past and the day Immortality is at hand. The night is far spent, let us efore cast off the works of darkness, and let us put on the our of light. I say again, Be upon the finishing part your work; endeavour to have them polished and com∣pleat.
The Church of Sardis was admonished, Be wat ful and strengthen the things which remain, that are re to dye, for I have not found thy works perfect before G Now this finding fault, doth instruct us on the other ha that we should have our works perfect before God, which we do endeavour with all our Heart and with all our S and all our might, God himself will perfect and add u it, untill it become acceptable in his sight. Being confid of this very thing, that whatever good work he hath begu any of you, he will perform it untill the day of the Lord s. And again it is written, Lord, thou wilt ordain  for us: For thou also hast wrought all our works in us.  der which word, peace, the things that belong to our pe are comprehended and included, even future Salva and Glory. Who are kept by the power of God thr faith unto Salvation, ready to be revealed in the last ti Receiving the end of your faith even the Salvation of  Souls. I do hereby exhort the people of this my Gener on and Country, to be upon the finishing part of y work which God hath given you severally on the E for to do. For so an entrance shall be ministred unto abundantly into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord Saviour Jesus Christ. Wherefore I will not be negligent to you always in Remembrance of these things, though ye  them, and be established in the present truth. Yea I think it  as long as I am in this Tabernacle, to stir you up by putting yo Remembrance, knowing that shortly I must put off this my ∣bernacle, even as our Lord Jesus Christ (who is the word of G hath shewed me. Moreover I will endeavour (for which sa reason I desire that this profitable Book of a content and willingness to dye may be Printed and Published)  you may be able after my decease to have these things always remembrance. And seeing that it is but a very little while fore that I shall certainly depart of from the Stage of  Earth, I commend you to God and to the word of his gr which is able to build you up and to give you an inheritan mong all them which are Sanctified. I commend you also the teaching of the Spirit, Lord, evermore give us this Br Lord, evermore give us the teaching of thy Spirit.
anointing which we have received of him abideth you, and ye need not that any Man teach you: But as same Anointing teacheth you of all things and is truth and is lye, and even as it hath taught you ye shall abide in him, nd now little Children abide in him, that when he shall ap∣r, we may have confidence and not be ashamed before him  his coming. As the Apostle said, I am determined know nothing among ye, but Jesus Christ and him cruci∣. So for my part I am determined and purposed  pray God to enable me that herein I may turn my poses into performances, and to pay my vows to the most hest) To turn ouer a new leaf, and during the few  evil days remaining of my Pilgrimage to serve God  more diligently and earnestly and constantly in the nistry than I have heretofore, and to finish that part of  Ministry which I have received, and to testifie the spel of the grace of God to the people of this Gene∣ion. For I assuredly know that a dying hour will come, d I sensibly feeling within my self a fear of Death, ich doth hence arise: either because I live in some re∣ved or known sin, or I leave some duty undone which ought to do: So that the way to take off and remove s same fear and bitterness of Death in me, is, not to e in any manner of sin or appearance of evil, as far d as often as I apprehend such a thing to be the mmand and will of God that I should do. The same applicable to other people also, to live in no sin of ission or commission, which if we observe accord∣gly and finish severally the work which God gave us  do, than at length we shall be ever with the Lord,  receive the reward of so doing. Wherefore comfort e marginal reading is exhort) one another with these ords. 1 Thes. 4. 18. Christ did finish the work which God the Father gave n to do, as he took upon himself to be the Saviour and edeemer of Mankind and as he was the mediatour be∣een God and Man; and as he executed that threefold ffice of King, Priest and Prophet. Yet have I set my ing upon the Holy Hill of Zion, Psal 2. 6. The Lord hath orn and will not repent, Thou art a Priest for ever after the
order of Melchisedech, Psal. 110. 4. For Moses truly sa unto the Fathers, a Prophet shall the Lord God raise up un you of your Brethren like unto me, him shall ye hear in all thin whatsoever he shall say unto you, Acts 3. 22. This Peter did a ply unto Christ, and as Christ did perform and fini these three several Offices, he did finish the work th God gave him to do: Wherefore himself said on the Cro It is finished. That is, so much and that part of the wo which God had given him on this Earth for to do an finish, he did finish accordingly. But as to his delive ing up the Kingdom to the Father, and as to his sitting  the right hand of God, making intercession for us, th is not finished as yet, nor will be finished until the en of the world, when time shall be no longer. What kind of work it was which Christ did finish, we ma gather and understand from what himself aftervvards d clares. I have manifested thy name unto the Men which th gavest me out of the world. For I have given unto them  words which thou gavest unto me, and they have received the John 17. 6, 8. This Christ did as he was a Prophet  Preacher. From whence we may gather and observ that to manifest the name of God to people out of th World, and to make known the words which Go first gave unto us, is the best and most excellent wo that one can be imployed in. And however other peop are busied (Martha, Martha, thou art careful and troubl about many things, but one thing is needful.) Yet that  the best employment and the best business, which ha relation immediately to God himself, and is about th things partaining to endless Life. And this is life etern that they might know thee the only true God, and J sus Christ whom thou hast sent. From hence again it a pears that to manifest or make God known, or to Pu lish those words which contain the knowledge of Go is the best of Works and Employments. Verily th art a God that hidest thy self, O God of Israel the Savio And many times we lose the sence of him. No what brings to the sight or rather apprehension of him or what reneweth the knowledge of him, this is th one thing needful for the Children of Men; for in th
nowledge of God all their well being doth consist at resent, and their Life eternal in the world to come. ow much God himself doth require and is delighted herewith, may be understood from what is written, For  desired mercy and not Sacrifice, and the knowledge of God ore than burnt offerings. The world make their Estimate accordingly and think hem happy whose Silver and Gold is multiplied, or who ave fine and plentiful Estates. But as the Psalmist ith, Thou hast put gladness into my heart more than in e Time that their Corn and their Wine increased. So I ad rather than all those good things, to have most of e knowledge of God and the things pertaining to his ingdom; to have the manifestations of himself, other∣ise then he manifests himself unto the World, to have ore of his Heavenly truths Communicated and revealed nto me. I will praise thee with the Psaltery, even thy truth  my God. The Law of thy mouth is better unto me than ousands of Gold and Silver. I rejoyce at thy word as one at findeth great spoil. And seeing that the secret of the ord is with them that fear him, and he revealeth his secret nto his Prophets: I had therefore rather that his will nd secret be revealed unto me, than all the mony or states of the Earth. For these and such like are e∣dences of his favour and loving kindness which is tter then life it self, in that it reaches and extends Yet rther. Those who know and apprehend God by Faith, o as much desire and labour to have the favour of God, s others do to get Riches and the favour of great Men. or the favour of God in this life, is a seal and earnest f his Salvation in the World to come, Who hath also aled us, and given the Earnest of the Spirit in our hearts, Cor. 1. 21. To get, retain, or recover when lost the favour of God  a doing and finishing that work which God gave us o do. For the work we have to do in this life, is to erve and obey God, and to do the things that are plea∣ng in his sight, and thus to become reconciled unto im. Though God doth hide himself here on Earth from s, and is afar off in the Habitation of his Holiness,
yet we are to seek after and apprehend him by sai The Lord looked down from Heaven upon the Children of M to see if there were any that did understand and seek G He doth Command and require it, that we should obey Commandments and serve and please him all one as if did now see him with open face, as we do our Gove ours, Fathers and Masters after the Flesh. That the se and fear of him that is invisible should be always biding upon our Spirits. The desire of our Soul is to  and to the Remembrance of thy name. Have Faith in Go which same Faith should overcome the World in all  Temptations, Terrours and Allurements. We shou prefer God above the Creature in all things. Althou God is out of sight, (his works are not) yet he shou be always in our mind. When we are in company a in the herd of our fellow Creatures, We are than  our shame be it spoken) most apt to forget God  Creator: But even in the midst of them his Excelle should make us afraid. Yea an Holy reverential fear a dread of his invisible Majesty should overshadow us a remain always sensible upon our Souls. And as it is R corded that At the going down of the Sun an horrour of a  sleep fell upon Abraham. Even so towards the going dow of the Sun of our life, A great horrour and dread of the  visible God should be yet more upon us as we come near in time when we shall actually appear before hi This is to bring down God and Christ from above, th he may be nigh unto us. For so he is, when we have  sence and fear of God always remaining upon our hear that it shall prevail against and overcome all Temptat ons, arising either from Men or from the things of th World; That as Joseph did withstand the Temptation of his wanton Mistress with this consideration, How  I do this great wickedness and sin against God? So wh thou art Tempted to Gluttony or Drunkenness or  the sin that doth most easily beset thee, here Reason wi thine own Soul, How can I do this wickedness and sin  gainst God? And let this thought actually restrain th from the Sin. It signifies or avails but little to think aright, unle we also do accordingly, for Grace and Knowledge d
increase the guilt and render yet more inexcusable, if they are not effectual preservatives and remedies a∣gainst sin. For as it is sin in its Power and Reigning which doth hurt: So likewise it must be Grace in its Power and Reigning, which will do good and save us. Wishes and Wouldings only towards good, will never ring any one to Heaven, unless they come forth into act accordingly. Indeed we should be excellent Christia∣s if we would so speak and act accordingly as we think, esolve and purpose. If we would continually from time o time turn our purposes into performances, and our ood thoughts into sutable Actions. If ye know these things appy are ye if ye do them; which implyes on the other and, that such are miserable who approve the things that e excellent, and do not follow after and practice them. The finishing of the work which God gave us on this Earth for to do, is by his grace and by our working to∣ather with his grace to render our selves fit for Heaven, nd to be meet to be partakers of the Inheritance of the aints in light: To be as good and Godlike as ever we an; to be alvvays a growing in Grace and Knowledge; o be making further Proficiency and Attainments in e Christian-Life, to go forvvard and from Strength to trength tovvards Zion. And vvhen any are rendred t for Heaven and meet to be partakers of the inheri∣ance of the Saints in light, there he is to keep and pre∣erve himself so, Keeping your selves in the love of God, ude 21. And also in a Readiness and in a state of Watching and Waiting against that God shall call r and summon e by Death. Be ye therefore ready, for  a day and an hour that ye look not, the Son of Man com∣h. And so people should first endeavour to get them∣elves in a preparation for Death and Judgment; and hen they have got in a preperation for Death and udgment, then they are to keep and preserve themselves herein, and to be ready and prepared for it yet more nd more. But some may be apt to say, Hovv shall vve be ready nd prepare our selves for Death and Judgment? I ans∣ver in general, by a constant course of Righteousness
and Holiness throughout the days of our Life; vvhich Ri teousness must not be in part only, but a Righteo ness in all things. It must be by answering unto  complying with all the requirings of God in thy  and conscience, to do and obey according to all the thoughts of Good and duty which God at any time  into thy heart, and to abstain from all those moti to sins and from all appearance of evil which thou any time preceivest within thee. This again must done universally, conscientiously and constantly, un you come up to that state of Holiness and Innocen whereof Paul witnesseth, I know nothing by my  yet I am not hereby justified. I Press towards the mark of Prize of the High calling of God in Christ Jesus. And where Read any where in Scripture of the higher attainmts in Christanity, or the description of such as are deed the Saints and Servants of the Lord God, there us examine and prove our selves whither they do deed belong to us? Are our selves such, as is there scribed? As we Read those many Precious Promises  are scattered up and down in the Bible, do they  long unto us? Have we an interest and share in the which we have according as we obey the several cepts and keep the sayings which are contained the in. Order my steps in thy word, that no iniquity m have dominion over me. When we once find our wh Life and Conversation ordered according to the wo of God's Lips, than we have finished the work whi he gave us on this Earth to do. God knows all things, and when he sees that the veral reasonable Creatures inhabiting on this Earth ha finished the Work which he gave them to do thereo than he takes them off again from the Earth. That  according to his own Divine method, Such as are  Death, to Death; and such as are for Captivity, to Captivity and such as area for the Sword, to the Sword, Jer. 43. 1. Which is not only true as to what kind of Death ea one shall glorify God by, but also as to the succeedin and after state, such as God knows and sees to  meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints i
ht, As from that hour that Disciple took her unto his n home: Even so the eternal God takes such from that our (of Death and Judgment) unto his own home, at is, he receives such up into the Habitation of his oliness, and into the mansions of bliss. In my Fathers ouse are many mansions. And then truly it is that such  us as are his elect and Servants, are at our own Home:  when we are at home in the Body, we are absent from e Lord. Than only and never till then may we be truly id to be at home when we come to be ever with the rd. Man goeth to his long home and the mourners go a∣t the streets. Such again as God shall see, know and dge to be worthy of stripes, who are appointed to eath, or for Death, will be assigned over unto it. For by e time God allots to each person upon this Earth, he n as well and also doth actually prove and try them hether they will be fit for Heaven or Hell, all one as they should live out to the period of Seventy Years. or as the Scripture saith of Jesabel, I gave her a space to pent of her Fornications and she repented not. And again, et favour be shewed to the wicked and he will not learn Righ∣usness: in the land of uprightness will he deal unjustly, d will not behold the Majesty of the Lord. And as hath en observed by others, that if the sinner were to live ernally, he would sin eternally. So it is contrariwise  the other better hand, If the Godly were here to ve longer or eternally, they would serve God yet longer nd eternally. The case of Infants and Children dying efore they come to the knowledge of good and evil, is ard to be asserted aright: But it is probable that God ill Judge and Recompence unto them according as e doth see by his infallible foreknowledge, they would e if they should live longer. But for those who arrive nto years of Discretion, whither they die in youth, Man∣ood, declining years, or old Age, whither they live long r a little while, by that space he gives them for Re∣entance, and accordingly as they repent or not, so will e deal with and Recompence unto them throughout ll eternity. According to their deeds, accordingly he will epay. He doth know and prove them by that allow∣ance
of time, which rank and Denomination they wi come under, either of Come ye Blessed, or go ye Curse According as they have done Good or Evil, so th will rise up to the Resurrection of life, or to the Resu rection of Damnation. Seeing that we know not how short a time God ma give unto us, to prove us and to render unto us for a Eternity, What manner of persons ought we to be in  Holy Conversation and Godliness? How ought we  serve the Lord with fear and trembling, To stand in aw and  not? For we know not how short the time will  before we are snatched and taken away from hence. W are always upon the brink of Eternity; but we shou so live whilst we are in time, as we shall wish we ha done when we come to enter into Eternity. We ma continued advances and approaches towards it, w do move step after step every Day and Night. Fr Day even to Night wilt thou make an end of me. A so from Day even to Night, yea and from Night u Day God is making an end of us severally as to th World. He is continually, and always a doin of it and never ceases: Like as the Sun is always i motion, so when God hath once Created and gave  being, he is again continually bringing this being to∣wards its end. And when the Reasonable Creature  brought to its end, then he hath finished that wo which God gave him on this Earth for to do, For a aforementioned, God takes none from this Earth befo he or she hath finished that work which he gave the hereon for to do, or he sees they would finish it, or b Idle therein: And accordingly he doth proportion o his Judgment and final Retribution to each of them For the method of God is before he proceeds to Rewa or Punishment with the inhabitants of the Earth,  will go down now and see whither they have done altogeth according to the cry which is come to me, and if not I wi know, Gen. 18. 21. And so God will go down into th Vally of Jehoshaphat to meet with and Judge all Nation of every Generation, and see whither they have done ac∣cording to the report of their doings which came up
the Ears of the Lord God of Sabaoth. He will punish e World for their Evil and the Wicked for their Iniquity. ut Glory, Honour and Peace to every Man that worketh od, to the Jew first and also to the Gentile. Seeing than that these things are so, that we must r all Eternity receive as we behave our selves during is short time. And again knowing not how short is time will be in which God will prove us, What ear∣est care and diligent endeavour should this stir up  us to approve our selves and be reconciled unto God. his should not only influence all of us in the general t every Soul in particular. It is I, and thou, and ch of ye, calling ye severally by your Names that e so nearly concerned in this thing. Suppose thy self  be the very person, whom God will call out next to eath and Judgment. If thou wert sure and didst veri∣ thinke that thou wert the next person of all thy Neighbourhood and acquaintance whom God would call forth unto Judgment, thou wouldst be another kind of Person in thy living, even more Serious and Holy, nd more Godlike and Heavenly minded, more Spiri∣tual and Pure in heart, yea thou wouldst yet more stand  aw and sin not. Thou vvouldst make hast and de∣ay not to set about to fill up and supply the things hat are vvanting, and to do vvhat as yet thou leavest un∣one. Wherefore the rather, Brethren, give all diligence to make your calling and election sure. Such a valu∣able and infinite good can never be made too sure of. That ye be not slothful but followers of them who through Faith and Patience inherit the promises. As it is vvritten, Let us search and try our ways, and turn again to the Lord. Even so let us search and try our vvays and examine our selves, vvhither vve have severally finished that vvork vvhich God gave us to do. For now is our Salvation nearer than when we Believed. But as vve dravv nearer in time, so are vve fitter for Heaven? And have vve done any thing more in finishing that vvork vvhich God gave us on this Earth for to do. Are vve novv more meet than vve vvere such a time since to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light?
Are vve become better as vve grovv older? And as  increase in years, so do vve accordingly and agreeabl grovv in stature tovvards a perfect Man in Christ Jesus Do vve in course and succession of time become more God like and more Christ-like, and do vve make further profi∣ciency and further attainments in the Christian-Life Do vve grovv in grace and knovvledge? And  vve become Wiser and Better? Are vve meet for Hea∣ven? And are vve sure that if God should take avva any of us this moment, to have an entrance and ad∣mission therein? Let none be too selfconceited or consider herein, for the Lord may reject such confidences. Ye still I do hereby exhort people to use the utmost mea endeavour and diligence that ye may become meet f Heaven and never to give over, nor yet stand still i this same good vvork. Not as though you had already a tained, or were already perfect, but ye are still to pre tovvards the mark of the high calling of God in Chri Jesus. To be still Travailing and making on in the vva tovvards Sion. Although as it often happens in our jour∣neying to places vvhich vve vvere never at before, vv may Err and vvander: But here seek out of the Boo of the Lord and attend unto what things are opene and alledged from thence, and thus enquire and g into the right vvay again as soon as ever ye ca and so order the business that hovvever ye go about or athvvart, yet in process of time ye may be neare advanced unto the Haven and place vvhere ye would b And thus ye may ask and examine your selves upon th finishing part of your Work. If it is finished and ye are ready, expect then that God will call for ye. Now would it be with fear, or contentedness of mind if God should hurry thee away this very moment into the unknown and invisible World? Behold I have told you before, Sup∣pose novv thou art finishing thy course, hovv it vvould be vvith thee, even with thee, if thy course was actually fini∣shed, and thou wert to Behold Man no more with the in∣habitants of the World; That is, on this Earth and in this state of things. This is the Sum and Requiring of all Religion if we vvould be such in the midst of and
hroughout all our Life, as we think and purpose we ould do upon a dying Bed, or as we shall wish we ad done when we are actually in the state of the dead. For we shall than be sensible and reflect and Remem∣ber, Luke 16. 25. All one, yea much more than we do now. Hope we have which entreth into that within the vail. And o we should have continually such Thoughts and such  Mind, which entreth within the vail of these outward and visible things, into and amongst such things that are not seen. We should step forth into the other World a thought, before we are actually entred therein indeed; nd have our Conversation in Heaven before our Souls are admitted there. We should be no otherwise employed about present things, then as we are in an inn; for then our thoughts are taken up Wholly and Principally a∣bout the Place we are journeying unto: And so this Earth is but a through fare, which we are just to pass through before we come to Heaven or Hell. Again as we apptoach nearer to the end of our jour∣ney and to the finishing of our Work, See that ye walk circumspectly. Yea, with what exactness and care should we go through with it, having continued thought and Remembrance of mind, that each of us severally are o glorify God on the Earth, and to finish the Work which he gave me to do. The same should be our labour and endeavour accordingly. This is certain, that Idleness, Sloth, or to live in pleasure or sensuality (as to which the inspired Apostle ruly saith, The Widow that liveth in pleasure, is Dead while she liveth. Which also is applicable unto all other peo∣ple who do so, or who are lovers of pleasures more than overs of God) Nor yet to live so as to snort out our days,  say and testify again, all this is not a glorifying God on the Earth, nor yet a finishing the Work which he gave s to do. The reason whereof is manifest, because all this or the like, is for no real and good end or purpose But God gave us this life, that we should live unto him who hath Created us, To understand and seek after the Lord, To fear God and keep his Commandments, and do good and so shalt thou dwell in the land, Psal. 37. 3 To serve our Genera∣tion.
(as I do this day in Publishing these and many other words of truth which would be profitable unto them if they would receive them) to be imployed in doing the will of our Heavenly Father, that whenever he cometh and calleth for us by Death, he may find us so doing. Bles∣sed are those Servants, whom when the Lord cometh he shall find so doing. Who are sure to be about that Work which God gave them on this Earth for to do and finish. So that they are either finishing it, or they have it actually finished. And than they may make this comfortable return when they come to the end of their course as the forerunner did, even Jesus; who shewed us the way and left us an ex∣ample that we should follow his steps. I have glorified thee on the Earth, I have finished the Work which thou gavest me to do. Blessed are those Servants of the Lord God, whom when he calleth for by Death, he shall find either to be upon the finishing (I mean, who are trimmi∣ng their Lamps, Mat. 25. 7. For the wise Virgins had got their Oyl long before) or rather who shall then have ac∣tually finished the Work which he gave them on this Earth for to do. Blessed is he that Readeth and they that hear the words of this Prophecy, and keep those things that are written therein, for the time is at hand, Rev. 1. 3. Which may be understood as to those things also, which are truly opened and alledg∣ed from thence. To God only wise be Glory through Jesus Christ for ever,Amen.
