T2034 E224_3 99872546 124985
Strange and Wonderful NEVVES FROM VVHITE-HALL: OR, The Mighty Visions PROCEEDING From Mistris ANNA TRAPNEL, to divers Collonels, Ladies, and Gentlewomen, concerning the Government of the Com∣monwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland; And Her Revelations touching his Highness the Lord Protector, and the ARMY. With her Declaration touching the State-Affairs of Great-Brittain; Even from the Death of the late King CHARLES, to the Dissolution of the last PARLIAMENT. And the manner how she lay eleven dayes, and twelve nights in a Trance, without taking any sustenance, except a cup of small Beer once in 24 hours: during which time, she uttered many things herein mentioned, relating to the Go∣vernors, Churches, Ministry, Universities, and all the three Nations; full of Wonder and Ad∣miration, for all that shall read and peruse the same. LONDON: Printed for ROBERT SELE, MDCLIV.
Strange and wonderful Visions from White-hall. VPon the 7 day of the 11 month called Ianu. being the 6 day of the week, or Fryday, Mr. Powel Minister of the Gospel in Wales, being brought before the Council at White hall, to give an ac∣count of some things by him delivered in his publike Exercises: A∣mong many other friends who come to see what would be done with him, there came a maid, Mrs. Anna Trapnel by name, who waiting in a little room neer the Council door, where there was a fire; amongst many others she staid for Mr. Powels coming forth, and then intend∣ing to return home, she was beyond yet own thoughts or intentions, having much trouble in her thoughts; and being as it were seized by the Lord, she was carryed forth in. Spirit of prayer and finging from noon till night, and went down into Mr. Roberts Lodging, who kept the Ordinary in White-hall, and finding her natural strength going from her, she took her bed about eleven of the clock in the night, where she lay from that day being the 7 day of the month, to the 19 day of the same month, in all 12 dayes together: the first five dayes she neither eat nor drank: and the rest of the time, once in 24 ho: sometimes a very little toast in small beer; sometimes onely chewed it, and took down the moysture; sometimes she drank of the small beer, and sometimes onely washt her mouth therewith, and then cast it forth, lying in bed with her eyes shut, and her hands seldom seen to move; She delivered in that time many and various things, speak∣ing every day 3 or 4 hours, and sometimes praying both night and day, and singing spiritual songs; which many eminent persons hearing of,
amongst the rest, came Col. Sydenham (a member of the Council) Col. West, Col. Bennet, with his wife, Col. Bingham, the Lady Dercy, the Lady Vermuden, and divers others; who heard her declare as fol∣loweth, to wit, That 7 years since she being sick of a Feaver, and gi∣ven over by all her friends as one not like to live, the Lord then gave her faith to believe from that Scripture, After two dayes I will re∣vive thee, and the 30 day I will raise thee up, and thou shalt live in my sight; which two days I understood to be two weeks that I shold lye in that Feaver; and at that very time and hour that it took her, that very hour it left her; and accordingly from which time, the Lord made use of her for refreshing of aflicted ones, and such as were un∣der temptation: and when that time was ended, she being in her cham∣ber, desired of the Lord to know whether she had done that which was off, and from himself, Reply was made to her, That she should approve her heart to God, and for that she had been faithful in a little, she should be made an instrument of much more; for particu∣lar soules shal not onely have benefit by her, but the Universality of Saints shal have discoveries of God through her: whereupon shee prayed that she might be led by the still waters, and honour God se∣cretly, being conscious to her self of the deceitfulness of her own heart, looking upon her self as the worst amongst Gods flock: where∣upon the Lord tola her, that out of the mouthes of babes and suck∣lings he would perfect his praise. After which she had many Visions, and Revelations touching the Government of the Nation, the Parl. Army, and Ministry, and having fasted nine days, nothing coming with∣in her lips, she had a most strange Vision of horns; she saw fair Horns which were 4 Powers: the first was that of the Bishops, which first Horn she saw broken in two, and thrown aside: then appeared the se∣cond Horn, and joyned to it an head, and although it seemed to bee more white then the first, yet it endeavouring to get aloft it was sud∣denly pulled down and broken to pieces. The third Horn had many splinters joyned to it like to the skales of a fish, and this was present∣ed to be a Parl. consisting of many men, having very fair and plausible pretences of love: yet this Horn she saw broken to pieces, and so scattered that not so much as one bit remained. Then she saw the 4. Horn, and that was very short, but very sharp, and full of variety of co∣lours
sparkling red and white, and it was said to her, that this last horn was different from the other three, because of great proud and swel∣ling words, and great promises of kindness should go forth to it from all people, like unto that of Absolom, speaking good words to the people in the gate to draw their affections away from honest David. After this she had a Vision, wherein she saw many Oaks, with spred∣ing branches full of leaves; and presently she saw a very goodly tree for stature and compleatness every way, before which great Tree the rest of the Oaks crumbled to dust; which she perceiving, desired Scri∣pture to make known to her the Vision: whereupon Reply was made in the first of Isaiah,—They shall be confounded in the Oakes which they have chosen. Another Vision she had two nights before the Lord Protector was proclaimed; at which time she saw a glorious Throne with wing∣ed Angels flying before the throne, and crying, Holy, holy, holy, unto the Lord; the great one is coming down with terror to the enemies, and glory and deliverance to the sincere, and them that are upright in the earth. In nother Vision she faw a great company of little child∣ren walking on the earth, and a light shining round about them, and a very glorious person in the midst of them, with a Crown on his head, speaking these words: These will I honour with my Reigning presence in the midst of them, and the Oppressor shall dye in the wil∣derness. When she was at White-hall she saw as it were great darkness on the earth, and a marvellous dust like unto a thick mist, or smoak, ascending upward from the earth; and at a little distance a great com∣pany of cattel, some like Buls, some like Oxen, and some lesser cattel, their faces and heads like men, having on either side their heads a horn: for the foremost, his countenance was perfectly like unto —s and on a sudden there was a great shout of those that followed him, he being singled out alone, and the foremost and he looking back, they bowed themselves unto him, and leaped up from the earth, and shewed much joy that he was become their Supream; and immediatly they fawning upon him, he seemed to run at her; and as he was neer to her breast with his horn an hand and arm grasped her ground, and a voice said to her, I will be thy safety; and then he run at many precious
Saints that stood in his way, and that durst look boldly in his face, he gave them many pushes, scratching them with his hornes, and driving them into several houses: he ran along still; at length there was a great silence, and suddenly there brake forth great fury in the earth, and they were presently scattered, their horns broken, and so tumbled into graves: With that she brake forth, and sang praise, and the Lord said to her, Mark that Scripture, three horns shall arise, and a fourth shall come out different from the former, which shal be more terri∣ble to the Saints then others that went before: though like a Lamb, as is spoken in the Revelations, in appearance a Lamb; but pushing with his horns, like a Beast: being not onely one, but many, and much strength joyned together. Upon the tenth of Feb. or eleventh month, the Relator came into the chamber where she lay, where he heard her making melody with a spiritual Song, and after she had done singing, she brake forth into these and the like words: It is not all the force in the World that can strike one stroak against thine, but thou sufferest them to come forth to try thine, Oh that thine could believe thee for the breaking of thine enemies as well as for the binding up of thine own people, all things under the Sun, all things before, in or round about you, shal work for your good, when you come to know more of the mystery and life of the Scriptures, how will you praise his Highness? the Ene∣my is strong, Satan is strong, Instruments are strong, Temptations are strong: but what strengths are against thy flock, they cannot be with∣out the Lyon, and Lyon-like Creatures: But oh! if thy servants suf∣fer, let them not suffer through passion, or rash words, but as Lambes: there is a zeal which is but from Nature, that a mans own Spirit may prompt him to but the zeal of God is accompanied with meekness, humility, grief for Christ: and seeing thou hast taken thine Hand∣maid into the Mount, who can keep in the rushing wind, who can rule the influences of the Heavenly Orizon; yea, who can stop thy Spirit; it is good to be in the Territories, in the Regions, where thou walkst before thy servant: Oh, how glittering, how glorious are they: what sparkings are there. Thou hast yet a great Gust to come upon the earth a great Wind that shal shake the Trees that now appear upon the Earth, that are full of the leaves of Profession; but they have no∣thing
but outward beauty an outward flourish; but thy Trees, Oh Lord, are full of sap. A great number of people have said, O let our Oaks stand, let them not be cut down: But sayes the Lord, I will make you ashamed in the Oaks that ye have chosen; and because ye will have those, I will now give you other Oaks: and what are they? a first, a second, and a third Power, and they are broken one after ano∣ther: But oh thine own have had a great hand in these things: thine have said, We will have Oaks and Gardens, how have they run to and fro, saith the Lord? and now I will give you Gardens, but they shall have no Springs in them; but they shalbe as dry chopt ground; yea, as Fallow-ground: What lovelyness is there, to walk upon Fallow ground? you may have stumbling walkings upon them: you shal have no green grass in these Gardens: what have all the Gardens of the Earth been? they have been as stumbling blocks to thine: But oh, thou wilt by these strange wayes, draw up thine into thy upper and nether Springs: thou hast deceived thy Saints once more about these Gardens let them now run after them no more: but be ashamed and abashed, we have hankered from Mountain to Hill; We have said Salvation is in this Hill, and in that Mountain: but let us not say so any longer: When we shalbe drawn up to thee; then we shal prosper; and thou wilt give us a Vinyard, and Gardens, and frutful Trees of thine own, which shall abide. And after some repose she sang divers Hymnes, or spiritual Songs; and among other things spake as followeth: Lord, let it be sounded in their Ears, and let them mark, it will be as great superfluity as ever, as great lust, as great wickedness, as great enmity as ever; yea, and greater then before. Oh, they are all for them∣selves; and doth not Sathan appear in their Feasts, and in their Gar∣ments, and in their Locks: yea, O Gideon, when in thine own Family there are those that are naked and wanton, Oh let not this be found in thy Family. David had not such in his Family; and if thou must rule the Nation, then be sure to look into thine own Family, and rule that; but perhaps thou mayst say; thou canst not rule them: O then re∣member, what God said to Ely of old, because of his Sons, How can any go and cry out to King Iesus, if he have him not in his own bosome. But oh, he is a sealed One, then how beautiful will his Walks be; and if the
Spirit of Christ reign in his soul, then he may reign for Christ. O∣therwise not. Therefore, you doubting Christians, have a care that you have courage given into your harts, before you go out to plead against Antichrist, the Devil and Wickedness, and come you Army-men, and acquaint your selves with the Lord Iehovah, for if you have not ac∣quaintance with him, then all you have is nothing. Oh do justice, and do it for Justice-sake, and not for by ends or respects: And then, oh Gideon, who art in the highest place, thou art not onely to do justice thy self, but thou art to see justice done in all Places, Courts, or coun∣cels, and Committees, that they may not feed upon the Poor. Thou art not onely to receive pleasures at home, but to establish Righte∣ousness abroad. Oh by your diligence make it manifest that you love justice and mercy, as you seem to do. Oh remember Absolom, who was of a fair and gentle courage, and of a lovely nature, but it was to steal away the hearts of the People from his Father David. But God for∣bid your Honour should be stain'd with the least Guilt thereof. And thus soon after she ended in prayer and singing, having lain in bed 11 dayes and 12 nights together. After which time, she rose up in the morning, and the same day travelled on foot from White-hall to Hackney; and from thence back to Mark-lane in London in health and strength. FINIS.
