V348 E141_1 99872825 156550
The Victorious proceedings of the Protestants in IRELAND; from the beginning of March to this present, being the 22. of the same month. With a Letter sent from Master Brian Smith, Minister in his Majesties Ship called the Banaventure, riding before Kingsale, which was read in the Honourable House of Com∣mons, on Monday the 21. of March, 1642. Declaring how the Lord President of Munster, Sir William St. Leger, gave Battell to the Rebels neere Durgarven, kil'd 2000 men, tooke some of their Commanders pri∣soners, and slew ten with his owne hands. soldier with sword and shield, leading a group of other soldiers Printed at London for Iohn Wright, in the Old-baily. 1642.
The victorious proceedings of the Protestants in Irelaud, from the begining of Maech to this present being the 22 of the same moneth. ON the 27 of February, came all our boates and ships safely into Dublin Harbour, that had beene relieving Tredah and thus they declare their voyage, that the two first dayes▪ they spent in firing some small towns by the shor-side, about the 19 and 20 day, came foth before the mouth of Tredath Harbour, our vessels being all that caryed provision, and more to defend them, the enemy had chained up the Hrbour with a most strong chaine, which our men knowing the wind and tide being faire on the 20 day, man'd out a shalop with instruments to breake the chaine, and the ships to follow in, but the labour of the breaking the chaine, God had prevented, and by that wind and tide that camed our men safely in, as could be thouht the same wind and tide brake the chaine before our ships, even as the shalop come, the enemy notwithstanding with three or more peeces and many other men shot at our ships with all spit, but our men got well with the losse onely of some five or six men, but many of the enemy lost, but to the great comfort of the City, wo had beene in great distresse, and not so much when or provision come as before, in that the Noble Governour Sir Alen Tich∣borne had being in distresse, gone out againe the enemy and ta∣ken many Cowes and sheep from them, and lost but few of his men, a great terrour is he to the enemy as Sir Charles Coot is here, that thir very names makes the enemy shake, and ma∣ny times have they run at their names themselves being not neere. But our ships have unladen their provision, and com∣ming o Dubli the enemy laboured all could be to spoile our mn and ships by them selets at land, and a ship of theirs for that purpose at Sea, but our men burnt their ship, and toke tooke two peeces, a brasse and iron one from them, and are
the day above named come home to us, having victualled Tre∣dath for six moneths, but are going againe: we have some men come from England but no money, insomuch that our City is unreasonable burdened, to the utter undoing of most part of the City, for few houses have lesse then 11 12 some 30 Soul∣diers in them, and they to pay them money weekely, and some not able to find their owne families with bread, but all complaint gives them no relent, which makes great misery for the present, and will be more, in that all their goods being ta∣ken out of these poore peoples houses by the Souldiers, they being not able to give them mony, and sold by these Souldiers, at not the seven part what they are woth, so that little they have is consumed, these people left to beggery and heare no∣thing but sad complaints, and this is more on the Protestants then Papists the Protestants being more poore, what the cause of these things are, God knows, ut sure none knowes the misery of warre but those that see it, and sure none will desire it, if caryd as here. But for Tredath Sir Henry Tichburne hath turned all or most of the Papists out of the City there, for as in Dublin the enemy is sometimes, ay alwayes in some six miles of us, some times more nearer, ou men have not gone out since the last I writ to you, but I thinke will as this night goe out to a place where the enemy is very strong, God keep them, I thinke we are indfferent without danger of their taking us by forces, but fraud which is very much, but amine and sickenesse are like to be our greatest enemies, in the City publikely is much threatning, they send to us indeed the Rebels increase still daily, that not any place in Ireland, but all are out in great bodies, especially in Munster which was last out, they are now most strong, the heads of them being Lord Musey and Lord Roch, they have among them our Generals Countesse prisoner and all his children, which is much griefe to him so brave a man. We have report that Sir Philimon O Neale was so vexed, that he could not so presently take Tredath, that for spite hee went home and killed all his prisoners, being not lesse then 4000 but we hope this is not yet true, but certaine w are, that the Lord Cranfield that was prisoner to him; he hath caused to
be slaine basely on a sudden. Here is like to be much misery befall in this Kingdome before this warre is at an end, some powder is thought is come out of Spain to the Rebls, else could they have not so much as they have, more then at trust. Since the third of March some shipping hath gone out from us and hath relieved a place called Wicklow Castle beieged by the Rebels, and is goe to relieve another place called Duncannon, for our men i Dublin wee have had no great busi∣nesse hapned, onely yesterday part of our men went out for the field 3000 foot and 500 horse, and intend to stay out some time, wee have not heard any thing fom them, I beleeve they have an intent to burne most part of the Countrey within 20 miles of Dublin, on the West and North side▪ wee have in∣telligence that those Rebels increase still, so that nothing can be expected but a tedious warre; we have intelligence, that Galloway is revolted, but there is a Fort possessed by some of ours, that can command the Towne, but this Port is neare Spaine, as neare as Dublin England, and reliefe may be feared to come from Spaine that way as some have thought, but small corne by Wexford. But we have newes, that some of your ships are come to our coastes to keepe the Seas which will be well if so, for much need is ofit: wee have intelligence but something doubtful it is that with some 150 of the English landed in Munster the Noble President of Munster being before distres∣sed by the Reels, but joyning with these 1500 from England, went against the Rebels, being a great multitude ld by thd Lord Mountgarrt, our men pursued the Rebels killed no lesse then 2000 of them, but little losse on our side, and some thinke the Lord Montgarret himselfe is killed, but this is something doubtfully reported, but most say its tru, that are of account, but sure Iam, that all is like to be very low brought are they are better, and this like to be a tedious warre. We have newes out of the North, but somewhat uncertaine, that the Scots have give a defeat to the Rebels there, and killed no lesse then 1500. We have newes also from Tredath, that Sir Henry Tichorne
issued out, and beat upon part of the enemies Canpe, on that part where one Collonell Ma Brians Quarter was a Collonell of the enemy, but with a 1000 men, Sir Henry entred battle, the enemy being 3000, some say 4000, but Sir Henry rooted them all, killed foure hundred, tooke two hundred prisoners, and the rest fled away, so now for the present hee is not so hard besieged, and hee hath burned 20 townes about him. THe second of March we arrived at Kingsaile, where we understand that in the whole Province of Mun∣ster (which was least suspected) the Irish are all revolted. They have swept away all the English Cattell, and strip∣ped them of all naked; in one weke they kil'd 55000. English sheepe, and doe vow they will not leave an English mans Foot, but will quite extripate man beast. What they doe about Dublin, and in the North we heare not, Colo∣nell Barry is made Generall of their Forces in Munster; they have besieged the City of Corke already, and the Town of Kingsaile, expected to surprized every houre, if the Kings Ships (which keepe them in awe) leave them in har∣bour, the Fort of Kingsaile is made a strong place, but they want Men, Money, and Ammunion; only the Admirall here hath supplyed it with victuals and armes for a 100 men for six weekes, but the workes there will require above 500. men, o make it good against an Army; I con∣ceive it is a place of the greatest consequnce in the Pro∣vincce▪ It is lamentable to consider the want and misery and feare the poore English live in at this time; they have betaken themselvee to some places of refuge, as to Castle∣haven, rook-haven, Baltmore. Bandonbridge is furnshed with 1000. men for six moneths, Corke for a longer time, Youghall is of little strength, the Fort of Duncaon is for the King, with a little provision for a few days, but if they have not speedy reliefe, they must perish either by Famine
or Sword. It were endlesse to relate what savage and bar∣barous acts are done by the Irish, especially aginst Mini∣sters; I will but instance in one. There 17 more▪ of them came to a Minstrs house, they stript him and his wife naked, bound them backe to bck cut off his privy members, then one after anoher did a∣vish her upon her husband backe, thn cut both their throats. The Lord Mackerly, the Lord Muscroe, the Lord Roch &c. after promise and protestation of their fidelity to the King, and thereupon were furnished with some Armes and pow∣der, are all turn'd Rebels; there is scarce one Irish man but is a Rebell. The Lord President of Munster Sir William Saint Leger went out lately against the Rbells with so many horse and foot, that his force and Sir Charles Vavasers Regiment joy∣ning together, made 5 or 600 horse and 3000 foot, thy gave battle to the Rebels neare Dungarven, killed neare 2000 men, tooke some of the Commanders prisoners; after that they marched to Dungarven Castle. and tooke it from the Rebels, where was good booty for his Souldiers, where he hath left a Garrison, and some Gunnes to keepe it, and now is approaching Corke (if he can) to raise that iege. They burne and spoile, and rase all as they goe. My Lord President is very valiant and zealous, it is said he killed ten men with his owne hands. The Irish wants Armes as yet, I pray God our best endeavours may pre∣vent them. We are all in good health aboard the Bonadven∣ture. So with my love to your selfe, and to one and all of my friends, in haste I rest Your very loving brother Brian Smith. From a board his Majesties ship the Bonadventure riding before King∣sale March 7. 1641. FINIS.
