V664B 45504553 171866
HIS ROYAL HIGHNES The Duke of SAVOY's Proclamation On BEHALF of the VAƲDOIS. VICTOR AMEDAEUS II. By the Grace of God Duke of Savoy, Prince of Piedmont, King of Cyprus, &c. WHEREAS we have been obli∣ged by the reiterated and pres∣sing Instances of a Foreign Force overpowering us, to issue forth the Edicts of the 31st. of January, and 9th. of April, 1686. against our faithful Subjects the Protestants of the Valleys of Lucerne, Pe∣rouse, St. Martin, and the Neighbouring Places, viz. Prarustino, St. Bartholomew, and Roche-Platte. And whereas we have been invited to receive them into our Favour, by the manifest Proofs of Fidelity, and Authentick Marks of Zeal for our Service, which these our Protestant Subjects have given, and continue to give us: As also in consideration of the Instances of his Ma∣jesty the King of Great Britain, and of their High and Mightinesses the States-General of the United Provinces in the Low-Countries; by these Motives we have thought fit not to defer any longer to make it appear, That they are altogether restor'd to our Favour, that they may be the more exci∣ted to make themselves worthy of it. And by these Presents, which we will to have the Force of an Edict, from our certain Knowledge, full Power, Absolute Authority, and by the Advice of our Council, Repealing and Disannulling, as we Repeal and Disannul the said Edicts of the 31st. of January, and 9th. of April, 1686. and their Ratifications: As also all other Declarations of Punishment, Sentences, Ordinances, and all other Acts and Orders issued forth in execution of the said Edicts against the forementioned Pro∣testants, in such a manner as that they shall re∣main for the future of no Force, nor Effect, as though they were never issued forth. And like∣wise we give a full Release and intire Remission, Absolution, and Abolition, as far as it is or may be necessary, of all the Infractions to the said Edicts, and of all other Excesses of what na∣ture and quality, and how enormous soever they may be, that might be ascribed to the said Pro∣testants, and that should require a particular and individual Mention; as also of all the Punish∣ments declared against and incurr'd by them both in general, and by private persons. We re∣store the said Protestants, and all those that have either abetted, advised, or favoured them, in their former Honours and our Favour, as they were before the Infractions to the said Edicts; Ordaining, That all those of our Protestant Subjects who may be yet detained Prisoners, and all their Children of what Sex, Age, and in what Place soever of our Dominions they may yet be detained, shall immediately be released, without paying any Fees, and left at full liberty to return with their Parents into the said Valleys, and there profess their Religion, without being mo∣lested or taken notice of, as well they as any body else, for the sake of any Act of their Religion, or Abjuration they themselves or their Fathers may have made, as being extorted from them by Violence. Forbidding for this purpose, to bring any hindrance or difficulty, by concealing them, or in any other manner whatsoever, to their re∣turning into the said Valleys, and much less to offer them the least Violence; which is likewise forbidden to the said Protestants against the Ca∣tholicks, who shall be willing to remain in these our said Dominions, and to continue to exercise the Catholick Religion. And we will that our Governors and Judges of Places be bound to see the foremention'd things perform'd; and that the said Protestants of both Sexes be no ways forced nor hindred to use in this their free will, and be at full Liberty to return into the said Valleys. Moreover, we restore the said Prote∣stants to, and will that they be maintained with their Children and Posterity in the Possession of all and every one of their Ancient Rights, Edicts, Customs, Uses, and Privileges, as well in respect of their Abode, Trade, Commerce, of the Ex∣ercise of the Religion they profess, as of any other thing, none excepted, even as they were before the said Edicts: Reestablishing and Resto∣ring the Protestants in the quiet and peaceable Possession and Enjoyment of all their Goods; Lands, Houses, Hereditaments, Titles, Debts, Actions, and all other things, which shall yet be found in being and Nature, and of which it may be made out by any sort of proof, That they have belonged to them immediately before the said Edicts; commanding all those that may be possessed, by any Title whatsoever, of the Goods and Effects which have formerly belonged to the Protestants before the said Edicts, That in obe∣dience to this, they restore and deliver them to their free and peaceable enjoyment, without vexing or molesting them in any manner, either at this present or for the future, under what pre∣tence soever it may be. Forbidding them and all our Subjects their Adherents, now and for the time to come, on account of the foremen∣tion'd Infractions, their Consequences and De∣pendencies, by the Magistrates, Judges, Offici∣als, Fiscals, or any other that may be thought fit, to offer them any further Molestation either Real or Personal, in such a manner as they may never be troubled, either in general or in particu∣lar, nor disturbed by any means whatsoever, ei∣ther in their Persons or Goods, by reason of the foresaid Infractions or Abjuration they may have made, as having been violently ex∣torted from them, as aforesaid. And there∣fore following the Example formerly pra∣cticed by our Ancestors in the like cases, we enjoyn a perpetual and final silence to our Fiscals, or any other that may be necessary; Declaring null and void from henceforth whatever may en∣sue to the contrary, promising our Protection to all those who shall be Molested or Disturbed not∣withstanding this our Declaration: And besides, giving leave to every Person Born in the said Re∣ligion, and making Profession of it, freely to go
in order  themselves in the said Valleys, but first taking; at the hands of our great Chan∣cellor, the due and usual Oath of Allegiance, viz. That they shall be and live Good, Faithful, and Obedient Subjects to us and to our Successors to the Crown, during their Abode in the said Val∣leys; wherein they may possess Lands within the prescribed Limits, and there enjoy the same Pri∣vileges and Prerogatives, none excepted, which are or may be enjoyed by the Protestants, na∣tural Inhabitants of the Countrey, except the French in regard to whom this Concession shall terminate Ten years after the [Future] Peace. Declaring besides, That those of the Valleys of Pragela and Perouse, who shall have occasion to come and settle themselves in those of Lucerne, and other Dependencies of our Dominions within the Limits mentioned in this present Edict, for the ske of any Inheritance, Substitution or Mar∣riage, shall have power to do it at any time, provided they come to settle themselves entirely there, leaving their Abode in the said Valleys of Pragela and Perouse; and we will also that our Protestant Subjects, that may settle themselves in the said Valleys, shall not have Power to Mo∣lest by any means the Catholicks Inhabiting the same, under any pretence whatsoever; allowing however all the Protestant Inhabitants of our said Valleys, to Buy and Acquire, without Vio∣lence, and Freely, all the moveable and un∣moveable Goods, that are contained within the Bounds of our said Valleys, in what hands so∣ever they may be. And therefore we Enjoyn, and Command all our Magistrates, Ministers, and Officers, and all others whom it may con∣cern, to observe these Presents, and cause them to be strictly observed: And to our Senate and Chamber of Piemont, to ratifie and approve them in all things and as far as may be requisite, without any difficulty or contradiction. And we will that they be Published in the usual Form in the several and respective Places of our said Valleys, and whereever it shall be necessary; and that the same Credit be given to a Copy Printed by our Printer Valetta, as to the Original it self; for such is our Pleasure. Given at Turin; the 23d. of May, 1694. V. Amedeo, V. Bellegarde Reg. Gallinati. De S. Thomas. The Chamber of Accompts of his Royal Highness. LET it be known to every one, That we have seen the abovewritten Edict, Confirm∣ed under the hand of his Royal Highness, issued forth in due Form, Sealed and Subscribed De S. Thomas, given in this City the 23d. of the present Month: And having heard the Conclu∣sions of the Seignior Count Peter Frances Fri∣chignono de Castelengo, Councellor, Senator, and Advocate-General of his said Royal Highness, to whom it has been communicated; and ha∣ving considered the Tenure of it (as far as it concerns and belongs to this Court): We have ratified, admitted, and approved, and by these Presents, ratifie, admit, and approve that Edict, with the following Declarations, as to what con∣cerns the Limits mentioned in the same Edict, understanding the same, which are expressed and prescribed in the last Edicts, and declared to be the said Bounds: provided that the Persons and Goods of the present Inhabitants, and of all others that shall take for the future their Abode in the Valleys, and Places mentioned in the said Edict, and in the meaning of the same, be re∣spectively obliged to all the Charges, Gabels, and Impositions, as they were bound and obli∣ged to his Royal Highness, and his Princely Suc∣cessors, before the Edicts of the 31st. of January, and 9th. of April, 1686. and as other Subjects are, and remain obliged: And as to the rest, ac∣cording to it's Form, Meaning, and Tenure, enjoyning that it be Registred in our Records, that recourse may be had to it upon occasion: In confirmation of which, we have granted these Presents. Given at Turin, the 25th. of May, 1694. By the said Most Excellent Chamber, Aymo. The Senate of his Royal Highness Sitting at Turin. LET it be known to evey one, That we have seen and read the above-written Order of his Royal Highness, given at Turin the 23d. of this present May, Consirmed, duly issued forth, and Sealed by his Royal Highness, and Subscri∣bed de S. Thomas: And that having considered the Tenure of it, and the Conclusions of the Seignior Count Peter Frances Frichignono, Councellor, Se∣nator, and Advocate-General of his said Royal Highness, to whom it has been Communi∣cated; inasmuch as it concerns and belongs to this Sovereign Court, we have admitted, ap∣proved, and ratified, as by these presents we ad∣mit, approve, and ratifie it: And withal De∣clare, That the Restoration of the Vaudois, or others of the Reformed Religion, of which mention is made in the present Edict, is to be understood to comprehend only and merely the Goods, Debts, and Actions of which they have been deprived on that occasion, and in conse∣quence of the Edicts that were issued forth the 31st of January, and 9th of April, 1686. And that from them are excepted the Debts, or Acti∣ons of any Persons whatever, upon the Goods and Persons of the same People, before the said Edicts. We likewise declare, That as to the Goods that were then bought, in which the said Protestants are Re-established, by the disposition o the present Edict, that the right is preserved to the Buyer to demand the price which he has paid for it to the Receiver of his Royal Highness, as far as it shall belong to him; which may by no means reflect either directly or indirectly upon the Protestant or their Goods: since 'tis understood that they are only restored and reestablished into that state in which they were before the said Edicts. And as to the rest let it be in all things according to the Form, Meaning, and Tenure of the presen Edict, enjoining every one whom it may concern to cause the present Edict to be observed, as we Record it by these presents in our Registers. Gi∣ven at Turin the 25th. of May, 1694. By the most Exccellent Senate, Dalmazzo. Translated from the Italian Copy, printed at Tu∣rin by Antony Valetta, Printer to his Royal Highness and the most Excellent Chamber. LONDON: Printed for Richard Baldwin, near the Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane. 1694.
