W2089 E71_22 99859884 111986
A True and Exact RELATION OF The great Victories obtained. by the Earl of Manchester, and the Lord Fairfax; AGAINST The Earl of Newcastles Army in the North. As it appears by a Letter of Sir William Widdring∣ton, sent to the Earl of Newcastle; which Letter was Intercepted by the Parliaments Ar∣my, and sent to the House of Commons. Together with two Letters concerning the said VICTORIES: The one from the Right Honorable, the Lo: Fairfax; The other from Sir John Meldrum, to the Honora∣ble, Sir William Lenthall Esquire, Speaker of the House of Commons. ORdered by the Commons in Parliament, That this Re∣lation and Letters forthwith printed and published: H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com. Printed for Edward Husbands, October 19. 1643.
To his Excellency, The Lord Marquesse of Newcastle, most humbly present these: May it please your Excellency;
I Thought fit to give your Lordship an accompt of our business yesterday, how bad soever, as speedily as I could; We had but three divisions charged, two divisions being of Sir William Sa∣vills, the third of my Lords, Ethings, and sir John Henderson joyned, being Eight Troops; the third division being of the left wing, put the Enemy to disorder, but Savills Regiment totally running disordered, and so put to rout our whole Army, we have in a manner totally lost our Foot and Dragoons that were there, being neer 800 horse, ex∣tremely disperced, but no great number cut off; sir John Henderson intends to assigne them quarters betwixt Gainsborough and Newark, some on Lincolnshire side, and some on Nottingham side, for the better calling of the Troops together; but of the strength of which, we cannot yet give your Lordship any certain accompt; but you shall not fail to hear daily of our strength; All Officers having order to return a daily accompt of their numbers; I have written to Hastings for his and the Belvoier Troops, which he hath now called to him, but with little expectation of any assi∣stance from him; sir John Hinderson hath written to sir Edward Nicolas, and Generall Reven, and I have written to my Lord Jer∣mine, to let them know, that without the King be pleased to send a considerable number of Horse in Huntingtonshire, to divert their staying in those parts, or otherwise to come in the Reare of them, in case they continue in these parts, that your Lordship will be very much straitned for the preservation of the county and Yorkshire, if your Lordship shall quit the siege at Hull upon this unfortunate action; I presume your Lordship will think if fit to fortifie the Church, and some part of Beverley, that so a conside∣rable Garrison may be left as neer them as may be; Their Horse are very good, and extraordinarily armed, and may be reported to be betwixt fifty and sixty Troops, being very strong; I do not know the number of their Foot, but we beleeve them to be about Fifteen hundred, or betwixt that and Two thousand; Their Foot was not come up to their Horse, and the ground they had chosen would not admit of above three divisions of Horse to charge at once; they are for the present at liberty to dispose of their Forces what way they please, either to Hull or Derby; I can but submit it to your Lordships consideration, and remain Pon Cotne,Octob. 12. 1643. Your Lordships most humble servant, W: WITHRINTON. POSTSCRIPT. SInce I writ this, there are divers Foot and Dragoons come in, so that I hope the losse is not so great as I expected, and I hope not many of the Horse lost, though not many of them come together as yet; if you be straitned for Arms, sir Iohn Fitzherbert hath six or seven hundred Musquets at Bozover castle. Sir Ingram Hopton certainly is slain, and Captain Abraham Marcham, and sir George Bowes, and Lieutenant Godfrey, Lieute∣nant Colonell Ares, Colonell Saint George, Captain Vernat, and divers other Captains and Officers either taken or slain. He that commanded that division that routed Savills first divi∣sion (being conceived to be Cromwell) is certainly slain, and one or two Officers more, Master Portington is shot through the Arm, and Master Wheeler through the thigh.
For my Honorable friend William LenthallEsq Speaker of the Commons House of Parliament. SIR, THough it were long ere we received any assistance at
Hull, yet when any came, I hope it shall appear we neglected little time in making use of it, an Accompt whereof I now desire by your meanes to present unto the House. October 5, we had a a supply, from the Earl of Manchester 400. and from Sir William Constable (though himselfe be not yet here) about 250 men; the ninth of October the Enemy assaulted one of our workes, but was repulst with the losse of eleven or twelve men, and six or seven Of∣ficers, some taken by my men, some carried off by their own men, as some of theirs confess, and some few Prisoners taken. Yesterday being the eleventh of this instant, I drew my Auxilliary Forces and my other men with some seamen into two Bodies, com∣manded in cheife by sir Iohn Meldrum, and made a sallie upon the Enemy in his Trenches on the west side of the Towne, two seve∣rall wayes at once, having placed three Troops of Horse, to keep off the Enemies Horse (which were quickly drawn into a Body) from annoying my Foot: The service begun about Nine in the morning, it was not long ere my men had beaten them out of one of their workes; and assaulted them in another; nor long after that, ere my men falling into some disorder, were forced to a re∣treat, and the Enemy got possession of their workes againe, which fil'd our men with much discouragement, and all of us with feare of the success of the day. But it pleased God, by the gal∣lant courage and activity of sir Iohn Meldrum, and the spirit, and vallors of my Commanders and Officers, my men were quickly rallied, and in a short time recovered all their workes on that side, and put the enemy to flight; there we purchased one of their forraigne brazen staves, one of their great Demy Cannons, which now through Gods mercy hath proved a staffe of Reed to them, that peece we speedily made a shift to draw away out of danger of their recovery, till we had more leisure, towards night, what time we fetcht her within the walls: We tooke be∣sides, one demy culvering, one sacre, three drakes, and one case of small shortpeeces all brasse, one carriage with great buller, and about an hundered Armes: After some two houres intermission the enemy had drawne together a considerable Body of fresh re∣serves, both horse and foot, and with those assaulted our weary men, with great fury, but it pleased God, infinitely to manifest strength in weaknesse, to supply us with new spirits, and after a skirmish of some two houres hot service, to drive the enemy cleer of the field, the last night they gave some of my outguards a strong alarme; but what we then imagined is come to passe, we finde this morning they then drew off the rest of their Ordnance, from their other workes, and have in some measure raised their seige, at least from so close a seige, though I heare and beleive they intend to keepe some workes at a further distance, onely some few are left as we conceive to face us a while in one weeke▪ while they get their carriages cleer, and in all this service, we do not finde that we lost above sixteene men: And thus through the goodnesse of God this snare is thus farr broken, and we are thus farr escaped, and we may truly say, it is the Lords doing, and mar∣valous in our eyes; and to him we desire the glory should be a∣scribed: We are confident the enemy will yet keepe a Garrison at Beverly this winter, and so though we have obtained some el∣bow roome for our selves, and our Cattell; yet we expect affronts and what mischiefs they can do us at that distance, howsoever now that this Port for the benefit of the County and Kingdome is thus farr secured, to the end we may not here sleepe unprofi∣table, but take all opportunities to advance the publique Cause, my desire is you would earnestly move the House, they would now if ever, contrive some way to supply us with moneys where∣of we are exceeding short, for the payment of my willing Offi∣cers, and Souldiers, who would gladly, now they seeme to fele the mercy comming be putting on to help it forwards, then which nothing is more desired, nor shalbe more earnestly endeavored by Your affectionate friend and servant. FER. FAIRFAX. Kingston super Hull.Oct. 12. 1643. For my Honorable friend, William LenthallEsq Speaker of the Commons House of Parliament. SIR, I Shall not weary you much with the Relation of some happie successes, God hath blesseed us withall since my arrivall at Hull,
knowing that many pens will be set a work, wherby neither the truth, in the narration, nor the favour and mercy of God, can be revealed Upon Munday being the ninth of this instant, the Regi∣nalists about break of day, did with a great deal of courage, being commanded by Denton Stricland, and one Little a Countreyman of mine, who commanded in chief, fell upon one of our out-works, called the Raged Jetty, a place of great importance for the safe riding of our shipping before the town: but by the resolutiō of two English Commanders, and a countrey man of mine, cosen germain to sir William Cunningham, and the courage of the Cunners and souldiers, they were (upon view of a hundred musqueteres which followed me from the mount) beaten out of the work, driven to a most shamefull retreit, leaving the bodies of their Commanders dead upon the place: many of their souldiers killed and wounded, Whereupon upon the 9. of October my Lord Generall did call a counsell of war, where it was resolved for us to issue forth, and to beat them forth of their next works approaching to ours: the order was to fall out in two distinct bodies of 500. Musqueteres apiece commanded (under my charge) by two Colonels Lam∣bert and Rainsborow, who with Major Forbesse and Major Wren, carryed themselves very bravely, marching along the enemies line of approach, on every side, the enemy abandoning one work after another, untill we made our selves Masters of their Ordi∣nance. But as the sun (in the greatest brightnesse) is subject to Eclips, so it fell out that the forwardnesse, and violence of our souldiers, was abated by a hundred pikes of the enemy, who charg∣ing the Van of our soot, scattered and in disorder did drive us backward again, regained their Ordnance, and enforced us all to a shamefull retreat, the Commanders and my self not being able to stop any one man (if the kingdome had been at the stake) In this retreat Colonell Rainseborough is either taken prisoner, or killed dead and fallen into some ditch, but cannot be found, his mans dead body is found: upon my Lord Generalls order to shut the gates, and the sence of their own carriage, a body of foot was again drawn up which falling again, with as much animositie and heate as formerly they had retyred; did drive them again out of their works, recovered all the Ordnance lost, and gained a Half cannon and a Demy culverin of brasse, which we had not possessed in the first charge; upon this change of the Scene of af∣faires, the Lord Marques, Lieutenant Generall King brought down the whole army from the head quarter, wherewith the 2 last pieces turned upon the body of their army, they were all forced to a wretched retreat, and to stand at a distance, untill we slighted their whole line of approach, we brought off nine pieces of Ordinance, one demy cannon called one of the Queens Gods, a demy Culver∣ing of brasse, two Sacars, and four or five drakes safely within our quarters. After they perceived that they had lost the two brasse pieces (which they did imagine we were not able to draw off) their whole body of foot with fourty Colours, drawes themselues within Pistoll shot to the Raged Jetty (where there great was) being resolved to fall upon it that night, but by the Order, the Or∣der they perceived was taken to keep two hundred Musqueteres without the Ietty, which could not have been done, if they had had Ordinance, and putting so many resolved men within the Ietty, they took themselves to their heels about midnight and re∣tired to their Head quarter, my Lord Newcastle and Lievtenant Gnerall King were beholders of the second part of this act, and as is report∣ed, King is wounded in two severall places, our Ordinance hath done them a great deal of mischief: and if we had had a fresh body of foot, they had been put to a great straight. In their retiring their other God stuck in the dirt, untill all the Countrey people were called to draw her off. Amongst the captaine (who deserved all well) Micklewhaite, Persons, Bethel, and Hardstaffe: For the Horse, Captain Clayton, the bearer hereof, having a generall love of all the Souldiers, did very good service, Capt. Salmond, Capt. Sibbalds, and Capt. Crooker for the foot, did carry themselves very valiantly. I had a blow on the side by a slug of cutted Iron shot from the great Piece, but thanks be to God, am not the worse, I beleeve her Sacred Majestie if she had known where the shot should have lighted, would have checked the Gunne for not charging fll home: Whilst we were in service in Yorkshire we heard the noise of the en∣counter in Lincolnshire, whereunto God hath pleased to give a happy issue, whereby you may perceive that God is upon the stage, and that Dagon  down. Since the beginning of my letter we understand that Colonell Rainese∣borough is safe: I desire that you will continue your accustomed favour to∣wards your affectionate friend and servant: IO. MEIDRUM. From Hull Oct. 14. 1643. FINIS.
