17752 44920370 173816
THE POPE'S PARLIAMENT, CONTAINING A PLEASANT AND DELIGHTFVL HISTORIE, WHERIN are throughly deliuered and brightly blazed out, the paltry trash and trumperies of him and his pelting Prelats, their mutinies, dis∣cord, and dissentions, their stomacke and malice at Pope Ioane, their ffting and foisting of matters for defence of her, and their Antichristian practises, for maintenance of  pompe and auarice. Whereunto is annexed an Anatomie of Pope Ioane, more ap∣parantly opening her whole life and storie. Written by IOHN MAYO. Quis tulerit Gracchos de seditione querentes? printer's or publisher's device ANCHORA SPEI Imprinted at London by Richard Field dwelling in the Blacke Friers neare Ludgate. 1591.
TO THE RIGHT WOR∣SHIPFVL SIR GEORGE TREN∣CHARD KNIGHT, CAPTAINE OF Weymouth Castle, and one of the Deputie Lieutenants of the Countie of Dorset, Iohn Mayo wisheth all increase of worship and honorable vertues, and at last a crowne of eternall glorie. NO heart can sufficiently conceiue, much lesse anie tōgue is able with words to expresse, the singular cō¦fort, ioy and vtilitie, that a Christian hath in this most daungerous pilgrimage,Psal. 27.4. in beholding the faire beautie of the Lord, in visiting his holy Temple, and in learning his dutie towards God, his Prince, and neighbours, according to the mind of the holy Ghost expressed in the Scriptures. This is of such great weight and importance, that it doth deliuer vs from euerie euill worke,2. Tim. 4.18. quencheth all the firie darts of the wicked, checketh and choketh all fickle and transitorie vanities, and ma∣keth glad, cheereth and cherisheth the conscience of man in all changes and chaunces of this mortall life whatsoeuer. This is of such singular force and operation,Heb. 4.12. that it entreth through (as the Apostle saith) euen vnto the diuiding asunder of the soule, and of the spirit, & of the ioynts, and the marrow, purifying our hearts through faith in Christ Iesus, and instilling the heauenly drops of his grace into our hard and stonie hearts, to souple and soften the same. This is such a precious balme, & soueraigne antidote, that it healeth all our maladies and infirmities, and such a lanterne to our feet and light to our pathes, that it doth de∣liuer vs from the power of darknesse,Ephes. 6. and translateth vs to the kingdome of Christ, putting vpon vs, vniuersam illam , that same complete armor of a godly man, that we may stand against all the as∣saults of the deuill. O how deare and sweete was this to that blessed king Dauid: how beloued of Saba Queene of Aethiopia: how precious
to Eunuchus,2. . 1.5. Cornelius, Eunice Timothies mother, & Lois his grand∣mother, with many others: and how comfortable and delectable to the Apostles, martyrs, and confessors. Vanitie is vaine, and all things in the world are but vanitie, besides the loue of God, and his onely seruice. Seeing then, that the word of God is of such efficacie & excellencie, and hath in it such a secret and hidden Manna: necessarie it is that Man which is borne of a woman, and hath but a short time to liue, should with all humblenesse and sobrietie, read, learne, and inwardly digest the same, and with diligent studie and contemplation, employ the course of his warrefare therein. God made liuing creatures (saith Chrysostome) for man: but he made man for himselfe. How for himselfe? onely to glorifie his name, to serue him with feare, and reioyce vnto him with reuerence. He made him after his owne simili∣tude and likenesse: he gaue him his lawes and commaundements: and therefore he onely ought to giue attendance to them, and to continue in learning of them, that through patience and comfort of them he might haue hope, faith, and immortalitie in Iesus Christ. Euerie one must further (as farre foorth as he can) the building of Gods Temple. If he can not bring gold, siluer, or precious stones, he must bring mini∣ma quae{que}, pelles, & caprarum pilos, the least things he hath, skins, and the haires of Goates. We must not be idle in Gods great har∣uest, neither secure in these perillous times: we must neuer cease to la∣bour and learne, trie out and discerne God from Belial, Christ from Antichrist, godly and sincere doctrine, belonging to the true worshipping of God, from erronious and damnable tending to superstition and idolatrie,1. Iohn. 4 1. according to that blessed saying of Saint Iohn: Beleeue not euerie spirit, but trie the spirits whether they be of God. These reasons (right Worshipfull) being weighed and throughly considered by me, I was not a little spurred and pricked forward some∣thing to take in hand, that might testifie and shew my zeale and fer∣uent affection to the same. And by chaunce taking Platina (though a shamefull parasite for the Popes, yet in manie places truly painting and publishing their filthinesse and abominations) I lighted vpon Pope Ioane, of whom he writeth and craftily, cloaketh, in the life of Iohn the eight. Noting the historie, and perceiuing what a miraculous to∣ken it was sent of the Lord, to the subuersion of poperie, and to the vt∣ter confusion of that purple whore: I framed thereupon a Parlia∣ment, though but a fiction, yet plainly declaring the great choler and
indignation that the Pope and his Prelats haue at the name of Pope Ioane, their palpable blindnesse, and malcontent stomackes, their gree∣die and insaciable hunger for money, their mutinous dissension and an∣tichristian practises that be among them, and their spitefull enuie and enimitie against the true professours of the Gospel: whereunto I an∣nexed an anatomie of Pope Ioane, more manifestly opening their clou∣ted shifts, and excuses for her, and more apparantly reuealing her whole life and storie. This (right Worshipfull) I boldly offer vnto you, although it may import small manners and little modestie in me: assuming so vp∣on your courtesie, as I assure my selfe you will vouchsafe of my good will and accept of the matter. The matter indeede (I confesse) is such, as deserueth to be handeled of a graue and learned diuine, and can not by reason of my ignorance and small knowledge, be so cunning∣ly and clearkely described, as it ought: yet I doubt not, but it is so handled, as you shall see Pope Ioane painted out in her colours, and behold (as it were) in a glasse, the loathsome corruption and per∣uersnesse of the Romane synagogues: howsoeuer it be, I am to craue pardon of skillesse attempt, shrowding my selfe wholy and solie vn∣der your courteous protection: promising, that if hereafter either my wit or skill shall be able to yeelde anie better fruite, I will offer it at your Worships shrine. For you are the Saint to whom in heart I owe most dutifull deuotion, being such a lampe and light of iustice and good gouernement in this our Countie of Dorset, such a fautor and friend of vertue and good literature, such a furtherer and fauourer of true Christian religion, and of the preachers and ministers there∣of, and so wise, well affected, and giuen euerie kind of wayes, that I should rather embeazle, then illustrate your condigne prayse. What godly and Christian orders be obserued in your house? How fer∣uent and forward are you alwayes in her Maiesties seruice, in de∣fence of the realme against forreine inuasions, and in detecting and punishing those, that wilfullie disturbe, and seeke to subuert our happie state and gouernement?Grafton in the 21. yeere of the reigne of king Hen∣rie the 7. 1505. Rightly do you aduaunce the great worship and credite of your house, and truly tread the steppes of your famous auncestours. For as that noble knight sir Thomas Tren∣chard your grandfather, in the time of king Henrie the seuenth, was commended and renowmed, and greatlie thanked of the king
his maister, for receyuing with all humanitie and reuerence, Philip king of Castile and Lion, Archduke of Austrich and Burgoine, and Earle of Flaunders, who was the kings louing and faithfull friend, and of old familiaritie and acquaintance togither, being driuen by force of weather to the port of Weymouth: so your worship within these few yeares haue beene not a little commended and renowmed, and greatly thanked of her gracious Maiestie, for nobly entertaining Lewys of Burbon, prince of Condee, being driuen to land at the same place. I could vse further discourses to this effect, but fearing the censure of smoothing, and hoping you will deine as well of the poore mans mite, as the rich mans treasure, and shadow this my slender labour vnder the wings of your tuition, I surcease any longer to interrupt your serious affaires, suppliantly crauing of the Almightie, to augment his graces and vertues in you, that after your short pilgrimage here ended, you may rest with the Israel of God, in endlesse blisse and felicitie. Your Worships at commandement, IOHN MAYO.
To the Christian Reader. DOubtlesse, thou maist maruell, and much mislike (good cour∣teous Reader) that I, who am but a tender suckling, and no∣uice in good letters, should presume so far, as to take in hand and publish that, which I haue rawly and rashly contriued, being a matter meete and requisite for a graue and perfect diuine. Certes I cannot altogither excuse my selfe in this be∣halfe: for I am not so blinde, as not to see, nor so impudent, as not to confesse my knowledge to be such, as is fitter to be concealed then reuealed, and deser∣ueth rather silence and reiection, then any affection or cōmendation. How∣beit, I am of the mind of learned Seneca: Malè mihi esse malo, quàm molliter.Seneca. 33. Epist. I had rather be counted foolish and impudent, by offering such simple stuffe as mine insufficiency can affoord, then slouthfully to sit still in the market place, and to be neither idle nor well occupied: especially in that matter that might shew the dastardly cowardnes, & bastardly causes of our aduersaries, who are suf∣fered (by reason of a few currish & cursed schismatikes of our owne breeding that haue disturbed our quiet state and gouernment, and troubled not a little many godly and learned men) too much to wallow & welter in their owne loathsome securitie, and to sleepe (as they say) in vtramuis aurem, soundly and roundly with little or no contradiction. What? Credimus auectos hostes, do we thinke that they are gone? Do we beleeue that they are cleane extinct, & ex∣tirpate? and that all their treacheries, treasons, & massacres, are dead and bu∣ried? No, no, this our silence towards them doth breed the more violence in them, and will (I feare) heape greater firebrands of troubles vpon vs. Our owne dangerous and gnawing Vipers (God be thanked) are wel tamed & suf∣ficiently curbed, so that they dare not once so much as to peep vp their heads. Now let vs haue a vigilant eye, and diligent care to these arch-enimies, least they being better armed with fire and sword, then with the scriptures and Do∣ctors, do worke our wo, and make vs buy repentance at too hie a rate. The times were neuer so daungerous, as they be now.Sine pace, Criminatores, Proterui. Men were neuer such , as they be now: and neuer greater perils were han∣ging ouer our heads. The Pope neuer bestirred himselfe more then he doth: the Cardinals, priests, monkes, friers, and all the rabblement of them, did ne∣uer intend more mischiefe against vs, then they do now. For the same Procla∣mation is practised now in Rome among them, that was somtime in the coun∣sel house of Ephesus: Nemo nostrum frugi esto. Let no good man be among vs. Therefore let vs look vnto them in time, and beware of their leauen and ma∣liciousnes, and let me not be too hardly censured, because I haue aduentured to offer vnto thee this simple Treatise called, The Popes Parliamēt, wherin thou maiest see a whole packe of Romish trumperies, and Antichristian illusions. Construe well my meaning, and accept my good will: willing by the one, to do thee the best good I could, and declaring by the other, my heartie zeale & affection, for the aduancement of Gods true religion, and for the suppression of impious superstitiō: howsoeuer thou deeme of it, I am comforted with this. Tantum emit vidua duobus minutis, quantum emit Petrus, relinquens retia, & quantum chaeus dando dimidium patrimonij sui. And so farewell. Thine in the Lord IOHN MAYO.
Candido Lectori. I. O. VIsne Antichristi vestigia cernere? vísne Romanam praxim cernere? Lector ades. Vis Papae Synodum conflatam mordicùs oestro, Bile, supercilijs cernere? Lector ades. Vísne Papistarum discrimina, praelia, rixas, Iurgia, praestigias cernere? Lector ades. Vin' tu foemineae contagia dira Iohannae Papae olim Romae cernere? Lector ades. Vin' mores, vitamque suam quam turpiter actam, Vin' mortem horrendam cernere? Lector ades. Lector ades, librum hunc eme, perlege, protinus ipse Haec planè & plenè suppeditata feres. Sume ergo placidè, iucundo sumito vultu, Authori grates pectore redde tuo. Floridus Mayi est, redolet{que} mensis. Floridus Mayo est, redolet{que} noster. Praebet halantes niueos{que} flores, Alter & alter, Huius ast flores remanent, vigent{que}: Illius flores pereunt, cadunt{que}: Fulgidos veros, rutilos{que} flores Collige lector.
In commendation of the Author. SWeete May is come, that winters frost opprest, Whereat the birds their siluer notes displaies, (As if that Bore as blastes had reau'd their rest, And Phoebus rousde from denne with golden raies, Comes with his shining beames, bringing them newes Of weather faire, which as they would ensewes.) The May is come that makes the shrubs to sing, Whose rubie streames descries the slow-worms watchs, And Philomela sits and feares no sting Of wrath, but quiet naps in rest she catchs. Each bird on toppe of tree with mirth resounds, Welcome sweete May, by whom our blisse rebounds. Our May, faire knowledge is, error the frost That nipt truthes Laurell boughes and flowers faire, The Protestants the birds that sorrow lost To see vndoubted truth to them repaire: The Philomela shewes our noble Queene, The blindfold Pope, the slow-worme cloath'd with teene. May brings greene buds, blooming with blossoms bright, Flora yeelds Poesies, May yeelds flowers diuine, Surpassing May dimming her glittering light: As Sol doth cause sweete Cynthias beames to pine. No labour doth his reaching minde forgoe, Whereby (O Reader good) thy good may grow. Sitting in harbours greene with vertues grace, Not in the chambers of fond Venus lust: He meanes to make his pen iourney apace, To shew the truth, and rub off errors rust. Then hither youth repaire with Echoes laude, Giue May due thankes, his praise deseru'd applaud. Robert Foord.
THE ARGVMENT OF THIS TREATISE. THe Pope goeth in his solemne procession: by the aduise of Cardinall Allen he passed through that streete, where the Marble image of the woman Pope Ioane was erected, and yet standeth, representing her filthinesse and abhomination: he loo∣keth vpon it, and with the sight thereof is so strangly afrighted, that he ran backe againe like a mad man, to the great admiration of the people. The next day he called his Cardinals, and held a Parliament in his Consistorie: where three questions were pro∣pounded & agreed vpon. The hollow chaire of Porphirie stone, vsed for the proofe of the Popes humanitie, was torne in peeces. The Marble image of the woman Pope Ioane was broken down, and all the English catholikes were exiled and commanded to packe out of Rome the next day. They seeing the Popes holy displeasure against them, concluded togither to giue him a thou∣sand Florens, and euerie yeere after so much, if so be that they might haue his blessed fauour and permission to abide in Rome: whereupon the Pope absolueth and recal∣leth them, and taketh them into his gracious liking againe.
THE POPES PARLIAMENT. GRegorie the fourtéenth, now Pope of Rome,Franciscus Za∣rabella. Papa facit quicquid libet, etiam illi∣cita: & est plus quàm Deus. no meere naturall man, but Lord of Lords, and king of kings, and more then God, as his adherents are blindly perswaded: after he had sate in the chaire of Porphirie stone, of some called the chaire of ease, or hollow stoole of easement, for proofe of his humanitie: mounted vp aloft in his gaudie Pontificalibus, and passing in his solemne procession, from S. Peters church to La∣terane, by the meanes of Cardinall Allen an English fugitiue, a man much fauoured and fancied of the Pope and his prelats, he tooke his way straight forth, and did not passe vndirectly by other streetes (making his way somwhat the longer) as his pre∣decessours haue vsed to do, for the space of 500. yéeres and more: where by the way he saw the marble image of the woman Pope Ioane, lying in trauel, who going that way, streined with pains, betwéene Colosseo, and S. Clemens church brought forth & died, and (as they say) was there buried. Looking vpon the image, and noting the fashion, proportion, and prodigie of the same,A straunge thing, in such an earthly God, surely. he was vpon the sodaine astonied, and as one bereft of his wits: in so much, that in a great chafe and furie, throwing off his Myter, casting away his Pixe, regarding neither his pon∣tificals, nor procession, he shooke vp his old crooked ioyntes, and ran backe againe, as fast as his heeles could fling, to his Pallace, leauing behinde him the Cardinals, bishops, priestes, and all the rest of the people. Strange was the sight, and rare was the accident, that he
which is equall with the Patriarks,This is the blind opini∣on of his pa∣rasites. aboue kings and Empe∣rours, and one that is al, and aboue all, that cannot erre by any meanes possible, should haue such a foule blot to his holinesse, as not to remember himselfe, as though he had dranke of the riuer Lethe in hell, Quae praeteritarum rerum fertur obliuionem indu∣cere: and so to runne and rage, as though the water of the lakes in Ethiope had béene in his belly:Ouid. Meta∣morp. 15. 197. Quos si quis faucibus hausit, Aut furit, aut patitur mirum grauitate soporem. Yea, it was such a supernaturall euent and aspect, as the beholders thereof, and all they that heard of it, did descant diuersly vpon it, and were stroken into no small admiration therewith. Some said, he had a celestiall motion in him, and feared, lest he should be taken vp into heauen,Plut. in vita Romuli. as Romulus was. Some said, he was verie ill at ease, & doubted lest dirges should be sung for his soule the next day.Ben. Cardi∣nalis. Some said, he had the spirite of Hildebrand, who being but Cardinall, did beate Pope Alexander with his fist, and kept him prisoner. Some said, the marble image was the cause there∣of, and wished it had neuer béene there erected. Some laid all the blame vpon Cardinall Allen, the Popes swéete dearling, & said, that he was worthy to haue sharpe and seuere punishment for it. Some also led with a better spirite then the rest, said, that the Pope surely was Antichrist that man of sin,2. Thess. 2.4. sitting in the church of God, & shewing himselfe aboue all that is worshiped or called God, & that this was a most liuely & manifest tokē therof, shewed of God, to the confusion & ouerthrowing of that beast. But Car∣dinal Allen (good mā) was more thē al the rest,Cardinal Al∣len, not a lit∣tle grieued with the Popes mis∣fortune. not a little terri∣fied & tottered with this chance, yea, he was so nipt in the pate, & stroken with such a paralyticall passion, that his Cardinals hat would scarse abide vpon his shauen crowne. Wherfore he with∣drew himselfe from the companie, & with al spéed he could, went to his lodging, & there locking himself fast into his study, he mu∣sed & ruminated vpon the matter, & at last fel into these spéeches with himselfe.Rom. 8. Now must I néeds beléeue, that all things worke vnto good, vnto them that be in Christ Iesus: and that truth wil conquer falshood, though it be neuer so finely or freshly coloured. Now must I perforce confesse, though neuer so vnwillingly, that the truth of God is mighty, & shal preuaile: that if the God of Is∣rael
come into the Temple,1. Reg. 5. the idoll of Dagon must néedes fall downe: that darkenes shall flie before the light: and the more fiercely mans wisdome shall withstand, the more glorious shall God be in his victorie. Now alas must I affirme that, which erst I haue vehemently and vauntingly denied, that Rome is the great citie of Babylon, that the Pope is Antichrist, that son of perdition, and that the Romane Church is the verie syna∣gogue of Sathan. For what maruellous miracles hath God shewed, that he is highly displeased and offended at vs? What strange signes and tokens, that he abhorreth and abandoneth our religion, and the professors therof?Esay. 30. What liuely and plaine demonstrations, that we are children of vntruth, children that will not heare the law of God? Is Peters successour, Christs vicar, the shepheard of the vniuersall Church, now an Apostata, and an enemie to God? Is our Catholique, Apostolique, auten∣tique, and mother Church, become an harlot, corrupt and putri∣fied? Are all our ornaments, orders, and ceremonies, but toies, trash, and trumperies? all our Saints and pictures, but dumbe stockes and foolerie? all our pompe, pride, and prodigalitie, contemptible and odious? Is our antiquitie, our vniuersa∣litie, and vnitie, whereupon we haue bragged and boasted so exceedingly, now vilified, detestable, and nothing worth? And are our images heathenish, but siluer & gold,Psal. 135. the works of mens hands? Haue they mouthes, and speake not, eyes and see not, eares, and heare not? And are all we like vnto them, that put our trust in them? VVhy then, vicisti Galilaee; take all, and pay the Baker. Thou knowest thine owne, and no power can pull them out of thine hand. But soft & faire man, Sic notus Vlisses? Cōdemne not so hastily, for, ; temeritie is dāge∣rous in all matters. Consulta quae sunt agenda, cunctātèr. Take ad∣uisemēt in those things which thou doest. Thinke with thy selfe, Rome is , Rome is Rome, strength, power and health, the Metropolitane of all Europe, the rocke of Christ, the spouse of Christ, the light of the whole world, & cannot with one small earthquake be shaken and ouerthrowne. Our Pope is Christs vice-gerent, the head of all Churches, the prince of Pastours,
and as farre aboue kings, as God is aboue man. He hath the keyes of heauen, the triple crowne, both swords, authoritie ouer heauen and hell, to let & set, bind and loose, and do what please him, and cannot with one bare mischance be harmed or discredi∣ted.Note the braue and lusty spee∣ches of a stout papist. Nay, he hath wealth and riches, treasure & iewels, and what not: and is farre happier & better then Peter was, who said, Au∣rum & argentum non est mihi, Siluer and gold I haue none. What is there then that can diminish his glorie, cracke his credite, or impaire his holinesse? An semper feriet quodcún{que} minabitur arcus? Will euerie bow that is bent strike the marke? And euery little blast subuert the Roman faith? No, no, it is farre otherwise. Re∣member that the Popes heretofere haue had as badde, or rather worse chances then this, and yet there was no contradiction to them, nor any derogation to their religion. Remember the acti∣ons of Pope Hildebrand, of Clement the eight, of Innocentius the third. Remember the opinions of Iohn 22. of Liberius, & many others.I channe Ba∣leus de illustr. scrip. Bran. Remember the madge Howlet, that sate vpon the middle beame of saint Martins Temple, two dayes together: where the Pope called Balthasar, with his prelates, sate in councell, flickering about with his shreeching noise, and casting his broad eyes directly vpon Balthasar,Acts & Mo∣numents, Tm 1. fol. 705. & 706. who would not be beaten away with libets, or clubbes, or crying noise, till with much cudgel∣ling at him, being sore beaten, he fell downe dead before them all. Remember also the straunge sights, the monstrous births, and the signes in the elements, that haue beene in Rome. and in other Countreys, where the Romane faith is profes∣sed. What for all this? Is our Pope preiudiced, or his holi∣nesse abhorred? Is our religion changed, our pompe diminished, our orders dissolued, or anie one iote of our ceremonies abroga∣ted?O worthie proctour for the pope. No, no, the Pope is too mightie to haue repulse of earthly creatures: and Rome is too strong to be blowne downe with so light a blast: Hic Petrus, haec Petra: Here is the faith: here is the way. And if an Angell come from heauen, and tell the con∣trarie, Anathema, we will not beleeue him. Well, well: but consilium domi: take counsaile and aduisement with thy selfe, and catch not so foolishly at the Moone-shine in the wa∣ter. Consider yet further of the matter, and thou shalt not
so lightly slippe it ouer. The Pope was straungely afrigh∣ted. No small matter. Where? in his solemne procession. A shrewed peece of worke. How came it to passe? by beholding the marble image of Pope Ioane. O this is gall to me,The Cardi∣nall caused the Pope to passe throgh the forbiddē streete. and worme∣wood to English Catholiques. But how did it chance, that he had not refrained that way, as the Popes manner hath a long whiles beene? O it was by my meanes, conscientia mille testes. I cannot, nor may not denie it. I neuer thought any such thing would haue happened vnto him: yea I thought, the refraining of the Popes that way to haue beeae causelesse, and but méere vanitie. How shall I pacifie this tumult? How shall I pull my necke out of this coller? With what face shall I looke vp∣on the reuerend holinesse of Gregorie? What opinion will he now conceiue of me, that hath loued me tenderly, fauoured me especially, and honourablie promoted me to the dignitie of a Cardinall? And what will he thinke also of my good country∣men, whom he harboureth, succoureth, and maintaineth at his great charges? Veh misero mihi, quanta de spe decidi. I was neuer in this extremitie, and I neuer kindled such firebrandes of troubles before. Shall I flie? that would be a most horri∣ble discredite. Shall I hide away? that is dastardly Shal I con∣fesse the fault? that sauours of base simplicitie.See the spi∣rit of a Ro∣mish cham∣pion. Shall I re∣cant, and hasten backe againe to my natiue Countrey? what? thinke not of that: be rather thine owne butcher. Shall I beare a bolde face, and manly resolution, and feare no co∣lours? Oh this is the way: Hic labor, hoc opus, est: here goeth the hare away. Procéede and feare not. Thou art a Cardinall:O noble courage in a cardinal, and worthie acti∣ons for him. thou hast cunning to smooth, Logicke to reason, eloquence to perswade, yea and Magicke too, if neede be, to worke greater miracles then these. Flectere si nequeo Superos, Acheronta mouebo. Therefore proface, and stint not: Audentes fortuna iuuat:Eneid. 7. for∣tune fauours them that be resolute. Hauing thus spoken, he left his closet, and went towards La∣terane the Popes pallace, following the counsell of Aeneas: Cu∣ris ingentibus aeger. Spem vultu sineulat, premit altum corde dolorem,Eneid. 1. bearing a
faire face outwardly, but inwardly pinched with manie bitter passions, and millions of griefes: and comming into the Popes court, as he had beene accustomed, was noted and maligned at by many, yea verie heardly and heauily taken: yet he went for∣ward, not forgetting Didoes lesson: Ineid. 4.Degeneres animos timor arguit: And hied to the swéete side of his good Lord and master the Pope: fully determining to trie the vttermost of the chauece, and what would befall vnto him. He found the Pope (as his good lucke was) in reasonable good temper, and recouered of his former a∣gonie:The great studie of the Pope that he vseth. yet neither occupied in the pulpit (I warrant you) nor in the studie of Theologie, nor feeding his shéepe, as Christ com∣maunded Peter. But how? he was with some of his Cardinals and other his especiall friends at dinner, where all things were lautè and opiparè, fine and curious: where no daintie cates and delicates were wanting, both deare bought, and farre brought, and good for ladies.Another great mis∣chance that the pope had. The Pope he so glutted and greased him∣selfe with good chéere, that his holinesse was somewhat plea∣sant, and in the same mood that the Poet Ennius was when he could best versifie: insomuch, that séeing Cardinall Allen doing his ghostly dutie vnto him, he spake after this maner. VVhat Cardinall Allen? you are welcom, come sit downe with vs, Qui é assai con che. Here is good chéere. These words did not please a little the Cardinall: they were honie to his mouth, Nectar to his heart, and heauenly harmonie to his eares: so that without further entreaty, he sate down with them, & fed as hardly & hun∣gerly,For all their boasting of their vnitie they quarrel one with an∣other, and differ in opi∣nions. as such a passionate man could do. The rest of the cōpany, not forgetting the late strange euent, did lowre & looked sowre vpon the Cardinall, murmuring and muttering at him not a little: yet fearing the Popes deitie, and respecting the high dig∣nitie of his triple crowne, they cloaked and coloured some hu∣manitie towards him, and vsed the best affabilitie they could. After they had well taken their repast, and talked somewhat merily of pretie pastimes and daliances:The table talke of the Papists, of daliance. the Pope rouzed from a swéet lullabie, eleuating his head with a higher Catholike a∣spect then before, began to fixe and cast his eyes vpon Cardinall Allen: and after he had rubbed a little with his hallowed hands,
he fell into some memorie with himselfe, & gaue to the Cardinal an other welcome, after this maner. Cardinale, voi non mangiate, vi vergognate? Cardinall, you eate nothing, are you ashamed? If you are, it is a signe of some al∣teration, and vnacquainted passion in you: this was not wont to be your fashion. The Cardinall with all reuerence and submission vnto him, thus replied. Io ho beue mangiato, I thanke your holinesse, I was neuer yet ashamed to take my meate: and it shall be a great alteration and passion that shall make me leaue and loath it. Well, well (sayde the Pope) I know what I know, and you know who I am. Nimia familiaritas parit contemptum, I haue loued you too well,The Pope repenteth of the great fa∣uour that he shewed to the Cardinall. yea I would I had not loued you so well, for then I had not beene loued so ill. The Cardinall answered, Your holinesse may déeme of me as you please, and speake of me what you list, I may not, nor ought not gainesay you, sub poena mortalis peccati: vnder paine of mortall sinne. But if once I should be found not lo∣uing you, or anie kinde of wayes misconstruing of your excel∣lencie: well may I thinke that I breathed, but neuer that I li∣ued. Decipimar specie (quoth the Pope) there is knauerie in your budget, and I sée now which way she wind bloweth, I haue followed your humour too much, and I haue had too great trust and confidence to you English aliants: for you haue brought more discredite to my Sea, more troubles to my sy∣nagogues, and more charges to my holinesse, then any other nation whatsoeuer: and this you shall shortly know more at large, to your bad digestion. The Cardinall would haue spo∣ken vnto him againe, but the companie would not permit him: insomuch, that he departed away with a buzzing flie in his eare, more troubling him then before. The Cardinall be∣ing departed, the Pope prosecuted the matter.The Pope exclaimeth against the Cardinall & his countri∣men. Sure I am (most noble Cardinals) that you maruell not a little where∣fore I reprehended and accused Cardinall Allen so openly, and dealt so roundly and soundly with him, as plainly to tell him of his offence, and duly and truely to conuince him of his treacherie. Assure your selues, cause I haue to do it, yea and such cause, as grieueth and girdeth me to the quicke.
For I haue found him such a péeuish parasite, and cousoning quondam to me his Lord, and high Bishop, such a poysoned staine and blemish to you his fellow Cardinals, and such an e∣clipse and downefall to our Catholique Church, that hee is worthie, not onely presently to be banished from our Court, but also to be afflicted with a farre greater punishment. Now I know the scuruie sycophant, and the paltrie peasant, tanquam Corui pullos suos.Fit words for a Pope. Now the beggerly route and rab∣blement of English miscreants, haue cast off their maskes and visardes, and shewen themselues to be flatterers, picke-thankes, and cogging clawbackes. Wherefore I protest and sweare vnto you by my holinesse, that they are eyesores and vlcers vnto me, and shall not from hencefoorth come into my sacred fauour and acceptation. Yea I tell you (my Cardi∣nals) that I will haue them cleane extirpate and exiled out of all my territories, dominions and prouinces, or else I will lose my triple Diademe and scepter.The Pope commādeth a parliament I commaund you therefore vpon your oath, and obedience to our holy mo∣ther the Church, and to me your high Lord, and supreame pastour, that you, and all the rest of the Cardinals, ap∣peare to morrow in my consistorie, by nine of the clocke in the forenoone, and especially Cardinall Allen that Eng∣lish runne-away, there to answere such things as shall be obiected agaynst him. The Cardinals hearing the holie fa∣thers commaundement, forthwith did execute the same, sen∣ding worde to the rest of the Cardinals, and principallie to Cardinall Allen,Cardinall Allen hardly delt withall. causing his lodging to be watched all that night for feare, least he should priuily escape away. Car∣dinall Allen now percyuing how much the fire was kindled, and what a manie of stinging hornets hee had stirred vp a∣bout him, was so perplexed and pestered, that he rested, a la mort, fit for nothing but for a dumbe shadow: yet scanning the matter more indifferently, and weighing also his owne worthi∣nesse and vocation more exactly, he did somewhat mittigate his griefe, and confirme his heart: so that with care-away and chaunce what may, he was this pleasaunt with him∣selfe.
Tush man, all is well inough, if thou canst be content:The Cardi∣nall coura∣gious, fea∣ring no co∣lours. let care be the least thoughe of a thousand. Can one petie misfortune, or one little fleabiting disgrace thy holinesse, em∣beazle thy fame, and sacke thy credite, illustrate to all Ca∣tholiques in Europe? No, no: if thou thinkest so, thou art farre besides the cushion, and doest shew thy selfe to be a boy, and a milkesoppe, vnworthie of thy name and dignitie. For maugre the holy father Gregorie himselfe, maugre the Cardinals, and maugre al the potentates of the court of Rome, thou canst not be once cloyed, or annoyed, or so much as driuen to a non plus in the matter. Thou canst smooth and sooth,These be the fruites of Papists. thou canst with the Satyre out of one mouth blow both whotte and colde: thou knowest well enough the fashion and frailtie of this Court,Omnia Roma cum precio. thou hast vnguentum rubrum to grease them withall if néede bee: thou hast enough, and enough, to pacifie this fray, and to saue thy selfe harmelesse. Therefore be not dismayde: sat supérque habes: and say with Niobe: tutum me copia fecit. Hauing thus spoken, he went vp and downe with a pleasant and merrie countenaunce, couering as well as he could, all his griping griefes and patheticall affections, with an outward colour of great courage, spirite and securitie. Yet by no meanes he could driue away the cogitation out of his heart, but euer he hammered and hacked vpon it, and especially how he should the next day answere the matter brought in que∣stion. Therefore he disputed pro & con, with himselfe: and armed his heade so strongly, and bombasted his braines so egregiouslie, that his force seemed impregnable, and hee thought himselfe able, in disputation to encoun∣ter with the best doctour, and profoundest Coriphaeus in all Italie. Well, the day and hower was come, wherein he should draw néere towardes the Consistorie, wherefore he got all his tackling and furniture about him, and went his way. As soone as hee, and the rest of the Cardinals were sate, the mightie Maiestie of the high potentate Gregorie came in, glittering and glistering in his pontificall and
princely robes, fortified with no smal companie of men and pal∣fraies,Plaine and euident to∣kens of An∣tichrist. and sat downe in a stately and emperiall chaire there e∣rected and prepared for him: after that he had well setled him∣selfe, he began this solemne oration. (Reuerend Cardinals) my owne déere and first begotten children,The Popes oration. fit and worthie pastours of my Catholique and Aposto∣lique Church: may it please you, to the health and secu∣ritie of my authoritie to the praise and honor of God,See his pride and ambitiō: he putteth himselfe be∣fore God. and to the encrease and aduancement of our Romane faith and religion, to consider with me, and to iudge vprightly of these three points following. First, whether the Porphyrie chaire, vsed for the triall and proofe of our virility,The points to be deci∣ded in the Parliament. is to be preserued as hitherto it hath bene, or else to be destroyed and abolished. Secondly, whether the marble image néere Colosseo, that she∣weth Pope Ioane lying in her trauell, is to be kept as an anci∣ent monument, or to be defaced and broken in péeces, as a ridi∣culous and odious spectacle. Thirdly, whether the English fugitiues are to be retained, and further maintained at our great charges, or else without any longer delay, to be vtterly expelled, and exiled. They all answered, it pleaseth vs. The Pope then went for∣ward on this maner. The popes iudgement in the first point.(Most noble Cardinals) I will first of all relate vnto you my sacred and Apostolicall censure, concerning these questions, and then I will permit you franckly and fréely to propose your iudgements also. My censure concerning the hollow chaire of Porphirie stone, is affirmatiue, and this: that it is no longer to be kept and preserued, as proper to the Romane chaire of blessed Peter, prince of the Apostles, but forthwith to be de∣faced and destryed, as a thing too base and contemptible, far vn∣worthie of our high calling, and reuerend iurisdiction. The rea∣sons that moue me are these. First, it is no small defamation and disgrace to Christ his chiefe vicar and pastour, to him whose power is diuine and emperious, farre aboue any mortall man, to yéeld
himselfe to so vnséemely and vile athing,Sabellicus, En∣neadis. 9. lib. 1. ab vltimo Dia∣cono attrectan∣tur. as to suffer another man attrectare genitalia at his creation. Secondly, it is a renouation, and continuall demonstration of the memorie of Pope Ioane, who hath brought more infamie, contempt, and detestation, to our sanctified chaire and religion, then now can, or euer (I feare me) will be well wiped, or ta∣ken away. Thirdly, the defacing and abolishing of it, will re∣straine hereticall and contumelious tongues, aswage the cala∣mities of these our times, quiet the controuersies of religion, and restore a more true and Ecclesiasticall peace vnto vs. Now let me heare what your opinion is. Conuenimus omnes, said the Cardinals: your holinesse hath spoken nothing, but that which is for the glorie of the blessed chaire of Peter, for the benefite of the ancient & Catholike faith, and for the assurance of our safe∣ties and dignities. And what say you Cardinall Allen, quoth the Pope? Vox tua raucescit? are you mute and silent? How like you these suppositions? The Cardinall with all mildnesse and modestie, thus answered. Conuenimus omnes. We agrée altogither, they are pure and Ca∣tholike, fit and famous decrees and canons, for your Apostolical seate, and for the ancient, absolute, and full perfect faith of the high citie of Rome. Perge, perge, go on, go on, quoth the Pope, you haue more to say I am sure. Since it so pleaseth your sanctimonie (said the Cardinall) Li∣bentissimè pergam, I will go forward with all my heart. Right well, may I vse the words of the learned father S. Hierome,In Epist. Haec est fides (beatissime Papa) quam in catholica discimus Ecclesia, in qua si minùs peritè aut parùm cautè, forte aliquid positum est, emen∣dari cupimus à te, qui Petri fidem & sedem tenes. This is the faith (ô most blessed father) which we learne in the catholike Church: wherein if any thing peraduenture be put not skilfully nor adui∣sedly, we desire to be reformed of you, who vsurpe the seate and faith of Peter. For if the holy mother church of Rome,False & vn∣godly opini∣ons. be so foun∣ded, built, and grounded vpon Peter, Prince of the Apostles, that the gates of hell shall not preuaile against it: and if Peters suc∣cessour and Christs chiefe steward, hath the keyes of heauen gi∣uen him, to binde and loose, to adde and subtract, to multiplie
and diuide at his celestiall will and pleasure: then who may vnder paine of damnation gainesay his heauenly sentence and opinion, and without his great curse and thundering bull, de∣rogate any one iot from his faith and religion.A notable Parasite. If your omni∣potent authoritie (most gracious father) be as farre aboue Princes and Emperours, as the sunne is aboue the moone, and aboue the Angels of God, without whom there is no saluation: then how may we, or dare we once spurne or maligne at you, and reiect your diuine and infallible sentence, in any matter whatsoeuer? You are the spirituall man that iudgeth all things, & you your selfe are iudged of none: and although you be found vnprofitable, and remisse in your workes, hauing no regard to your owne saluation,This was the detestable doctrine of Pope Boni∣face, an Eng∣lish man. nor to the saluation of your brethren, so that you lead with your selfe innumerable heapes of people, vnto the chiefest bondslaue of hell, there euer to be beaten with manie stripes: yet your faultes no mortall man presumeth to reprooue here, because you shall iudge all men, and be iudged of no man your selfe. Then your good and sacred censure of the Porphirie stone, (my most high Lord, and reuerend father) is of vs all to be adored and honoured, especially, since it is grounded vpon most weightie and substantiall reasons, tending not a little to the health and illustration of the holy church of Rome, and to the aduancement and propagati∣on of your splendent light and prehemence. For certes, in euerie indifferent mans iudgement, the preseruation there∣of is in no kind of way a glorie and furtherance, but euerie kind of way a scandale and ignomie, to the Catholike religion, and to the principall towre thereof the citie of Rome. What doubt can there be in the humanitie of the high bishop that is to be created? Can hée bée Hermophroditus, a man and a wo∣man,It is possible: for Semyra∣mis being a woman, was a long time taken for a man. both in one? Is it possible that a woman being not capeable of holie orders, can aspire vnto that dignitie, and be founde worthy of that high calling and function, in wise∣dome, grauitie, learning, wit, and authoritie? or is it pos∣sible that a woman can so long conceale her sexe, and not be knowne and espied? Surely, surely, the kéeping of the hollow chaire of Porphirie stone, and the sitting therein of
our Lord and high bishop, is of all other things most vaine, foolish, and ridiculous, sauouring of little wit, and lesse wisedome. Notwithstanding some there be,A foolish shadowing & friuolous. that shadow the matter, and affirme that the stoole of naturall easement, doth serue for this purpose to the Pope, least the soueraigntie of honour exhibited vnto him, should in his owne conceite lift him higher, then for the degrée of humaine condition: but this is to little or no purpose: therefore Dirue, confunde, downe with it, and teare it in péeces: Conuenimus omnes, We all agrée to it: let not so vile an obiect remaine in your court, and such a pestiferous custome of disgrace and rascalitie be anie lon∣ger vsed of Peters successours. Gregorie, séeing the Cardinall so vehement and vali∣ant in the cause, brake off his spéech, and said, Satis loquen∣tiae, you haue spoken enough: the matter is more clearer then the noone day, and néede no farther disputation.The Popes commande∣ment con∣cerning the Porphirie chaire. The Porphi∣rie chaire is brokē in the Consistorie. Where∣fore my pleasure and commaundement is this: that the Por∣phirie chaire be presently brought hither into the Consisto∣rie before vs, and be in our sight broken, defaced, and vt∣terly abolished. The Cardinals hearing these words, sent im∣mediatly for it, and soone it was brought into the Consistorie, and before the face of the Pope and his Cardinals, all hewed and shiuered into péeces: when this was done, the Pope procéeded after this manner. (Most worthy Cardinals) séeing that we haue fully and absolutely considered and decided the first point, and brought it to that effect, as is lawfull and expedient for vs: let vs come likewise to the second, which is: whether the marble image by the Colosseo, representing the woman Pope Ioane in childe bearing, is to be kept, and let stande, as hereto∣fore it hath béene, or else vtterly to bée defaced and de∣stroyed. My censure is in like manner as it was of the former,The Popes censure con∣cerning the marble image. that it is wholly and principally to be subuerted and abo∣lished: for it is more to be feared then the Basiliske, and more to be auoided then the Cockatrice: and it is a greater staine, hurt, and reproch to our seate Apostolike, a more manifest president and picture of the woman Pope, and
a more grieuous eye-sore to a Catholike,The Popes weighty rea∣sons for sup∣pressing of it then the other: this is publike and openly to be seene, whereas the other is secret and closely kept: this is easily to be perceiued of euerie one that séeth it, the vse of the other is hardly to be vnderstood of any: yea, this is the bodie and verie heart of Pope Ioane, but the other is but a little part and member thereof. I maruell much, what he ment that first caused it to be erected, and what my predecessours ment to let it stand in that place as it doth. What say you to it renowmed Cardinals? Cardinall Medices, a man of the greatest wealth and riches, though not of the greatest wit and learning, made this aun∣swere. Nothing is or hath béene (most soueraigne Lord, and supreme Pastour) that more impaireth the excellencie of your sacred scepter, more eclipseth the orient beames of your dignitie, and more abrogateth the rites and canons of the auncient and catho∣like Romaine religion, then that fond and foolish fable of Pope Ioane, which our aduersaries beléeue as an infallible truth, and most vsually cast vs in the téeth withall, aboue all other things. What meanes haue heretofore béene vsed for the remedie there∣of, you are not ignorant: the whole storie hath béene stoutly and stifly denied, and yet it auaileth not. Her name hath béene left out of the Calender of the Popes, and yet nothing the better. Onuphrius Pamuinius of set purpose hath béene hired to face out this matter,Truth it is, he wrote worthily for his hire, win∣ning some credite, by aduenturing his wits in a desperate cause. and yet it is neuer the néere. But this way propo∣sed by your highnes, is of farre greater force and excellency, and of such singular weight & importance, that néeds it must slacke and qualifie the slaunder, and verie shortly burie the memorie thereof in perpetual obliuion. For the hollow Porphirie stone, and that vaine and vile image being gone, what remaineth to continue the remembrance thereof? Who can mislike this en∣terprise? Who ought to reprehend this prouiso? Nay who dare resist such a worthie and apostolicall action?A parls page for the Pope. Then let it forthwith be executed, (most holy Lord) and let not the matter, that wil be such a light and lampe to the Catholike faith, be any longer stayed or delaied. Are you al of this mind (said the Pope?) The Cardinals with one consent answered. Verum est, saluberri∣mum
est, nemo nostrum refragatur. It is true,The Popes iudgement concerning the marble image. The marble image is brought into the Consi∣storie. It is broken into pieces, and throwne into Tyber, togither with the Porphi∣rie stone. it is good and whol∣som counsell, none of vs do withstand it. Then (quoth the Pope) let it forthwith be set vpon: let the image be broken downe, and no one péece thereof left behind. Let it be brought hither before vs into the Consistorie that we may sée it defaced, and not be deceiued in the doing of it. When the Pope had thus spoken, men were presently sent to breake it downe, and to bring it vn∣to them in the Consistorie, which they quickly dispatched, and did accordingly. When the Pope saw it, he said: strike it, batter it, breake it in péeces like a potters vessell, and cast it into Ty∣ber togither with the Porphirie stone: which was immediatly done, according to his gracious will and commandement. This being done the Pope said to the Cardinals: it follow∣eth now, that we come vnto the third and last point: but the time is past, and therefore we will omit it till the afternoone: I commaund you therefore vpon your fealtie and obedience to Peters chaire, to our mother church, and to the catholike and Apostolike faith, that you faile not to appeare héere againe in the afternoone by two of the clocke, that we may finish and absolue the third point, as we haue done the two former. Thus the Pope departed with a great and pompous traine towards his Pal∣lace, the Cardinals followed him, and the most part of them di∣ned with him: but Cardinall Allen went home to his owne lodging, hauing some attendant vpon him, to watch & sée to him. After they had well fed and filled their bodies with manie daintie cates and dishes, the Pope and all the Cardinals came againe into the Consistorie, and tooke their places as they had done before, when they were sate, the Pope thus Orator-like debated with them. In the forenoone (my louely Cardinals) we discussed and con∣triued fully and effectually two points which I proposed vnto you:The third point cōcer∣ning the English Ca∣tholikes. Now it resteth that we procéede likewise to the third and last, which is, whether the English Catholikes are to be main¦tained and farther retained, or else without longer delay, to be expelled and banished. I say, and say againe, and maugre the stoutest champion that liueth I will defend, that they are iustly to be banished, and I will produce for it such euident demon∣strations,
and alledge such apparant reasons, that you likewise shall both say it, and sweare it: what thinke you of it couragi∣ous Cardinals? Néeds must we (said they) say and sweare, as your holinesse doth: especially since you are led thereto with many weightie and great reasons. I denie it (said Cardinall Allen:) if they be exiled, they shall not iustly be exiled: I will neuer agrée to it, Dum spiritus hos regit artus: while I liue. Probo, probo, I will proue it (quoth the Pope:) yea, I will proue it so euidently, and shew it so expresly that thou shalt not denie it, and therefore marke what I tell thée. Didst not thou perswade me in my last procession, to take my iourney straight forth, and to passe by the marble image of Dame Ioane? I de∣nie it not (said the Cardinall.) Note that (good Cardinals) quoth the Pope: you know what followed, and what a perilous agonie I was driuen into thereby: doth that deserue nought I pray? Nay farther, hast not thou detained monny that I al∣lowed vnto thy countrimen? It is false, said the Cardinall. Be not so obstinate (quoth the Pope:) thine owne countrimen haue spoken and affirmed it. I doubt it, said the Cardinall. Thou shalt finde it true (thou runnagate) quoth the Pope.A proper kind of dis∣putation. Dost thou reproue me of a lie? O thou noisome baggage: Doost thou snufe and scorne my power and authoritie, and disdaine my words, that be of force to throw thée downe to the bottomlesse pit of hell? Haue I deserued this at thine hands (thou banished brat?) well, well, thou shalt repent it, and that bitterly, for thou (thou curst caterpiller) and thy cancred countrimen, haue brought more charges to me, then any other nation: haue cau∣sed more troubles and hurleburlies to me, then any other nation, and haue deceiued and cosoned me more then any other Nation whatsoeuer. Trouble not your sanctitie ouer∣much (said the Cardinall,) you cannot proue this you haue spo∣ken. I will proue it (thou scald begger) quoth the Pope, and I will rightly proue it, and therefore heare me (good faith∣full Cardinals.) If there were no other thing that were of force lawfull and reasonable, to make vs reiect and roote out the English fugitiues, yet the strange and noisome accident of
the woman Pope Ioane, were sufficient both to accuse them of iniurie and infidelitie towards the holy citie of Rome, and also to expell them our of our regions and dominions for euer.Vntruth, she was a Dutch woman. for she was an English woman borne: and shée it is, and none but she, that hath decayed and ruinated our high iurisdiction, and brought such a pestilent downefall to our Apostolike regiment, that I feare me, with all our art, cunning, and policie, it will not be amended. Shall we fauour the stocke and genealogie of them that haue bene such crackes and discredites to our power and authoritie? Shall we kéepe and maintaine them, that haue brought great persecution, horrible confusion and bloudie massacres to our trustie and faithfull seruants? And shall not we eradicate and cut off those Iudases, which cleaue to vs, and to our faith, onely for their owne gaine and refuge, and neuer do such homage, seruice and obedience to our wor∣thinesse, as is requisite and expedient for them? O most wor∣thy Cardinals, looke from the beginning that euer our religi∣on was professed in England, and you shall sée what small zeale, loue, and affection it hath there receiued. And first looke vpon their kings and rulers, and you shall finde them to be the verie maules of the Romaine bishops. Cambra the daughter of Belin, that married the Almaine prince, made long and sharpe warre against this sacred citie, and was like to spoile and sacke it. So did Brennus the bro∣ther of Belin and others more, as we finde it recorded. King William the Conquerour,Matthias Pa∣risiensis. Anno. 1094. vpon displeasure conceiued against the high bishop of Rome, said, that no archbishop or bishop of his realme, from thenceforth should haue regard, either to the court of Rome, or to the bishop thereof. King VVilliam Rufus,Prohibition of going to Rome by king William Rufus. Anno 1098. in his time would not suffer any of his subiects to go to Rome. What shall I speake of king Henrie the third, who stayed the attempts of the Popes Legate, and made open complaint by his Am∣bassadour in the Councell of Lions in France, of him and his exactions: of king Henrie the eight, who first renounced this Sée, and the supreme pastour hereof: of king Edward the sixt, who was the first that vtterly abolished all our su∣perstition, and of the roiall maiestie of quéene Elizabeth that
now is,God long preserue her, and confoūd all her eni∣mies. A famous learned mā, who wrote diuers books and sundrie inuectiues a∣gainst the Pope, & re∣proued ma∣nifold abu∣ses in the church of Rome. Laurence proued the Pope Anti∣christ, and Rome Babi∣lon. An. 1290 Wickliffe a very learned man, liuing in the raigne of king Ed∣ward the 3. Anno. 1371. who first manifestly discouered the Pope, & maintained open dispu∣tatiō against him. Anno. 1581. Vide the A∣bridgment of the Acts and Monu∣ments, pag. 285. the illustrate lampe and Phenix of all the world, the mother of Christian Princes, and the verie Maul of me, and all my ceremonies? Looke vpon their bishops and doctours, and you shall finde them to be blocks in our way, and the onely subuer∣ters of our faith and dominion. What shall I tell you of Gro∣sted, sometime bishop of Lincolne, who wrote diuers inuectiues against the high bishop Innocentius the fourth, and reproued manifold abuses in the church of Rome, yea and said, that this old verse may be truly verified vpon it. Eius auaritiae, totus vix sufficit orbis, Eius luxuriae, meretrix non sufficit vna. The whole world doth scarse satisfie his couetousnesse, neither doth one harlot suffice for his leacherie. I omit to tell you of Laurence, Wickliffe, and an hundred other such, who proud∣ly withstood the bishop of Rome, made open disputation against him, called him Antichrist, and Rome great Babilon. And as they haue earnestly and eagerly withstood and oppugned vs and our faith: so haue they euill entreated, and cruelly handled the professours thereof. Héere I might tell you of Becket, Moore, Roffensis, and manie others, how bitterly they haue béene vsed by them, and what torments and tortures they haue suffered for the profession of our faith. I will come to men of later and fresher memorie, and to those which with a false cloake and counterfait shew, haue deceiued our holinesse, and brought our religion into miserable contempt and obloquie. Who knoweth not the lewd pranckes and knauerie that Stukely that arrant vagabound, plaid of late with vs? Who knoweth not the bold presumption, and diuelish attempts of that mad and harebraind Sacramentarie, Richard Atkins, who rebuked the disorder of our liues, proudly and heretically with splene and rancour, scorned, vpbraided, and vilified this grounded rocke of Peter, caught at the holy sacrament, as the priest was carrying it, to haue throwne it downe, and héere in S. Peters church, threw downe the Chalice with the wine, and striued to haue pulled the cake out of the priests hands. I could recite others vnto you, as Nichols, Munday, with manie more, who like peruerse hypo∣crites dissembled to be constant Catholiques, and made external
shew thereof, but afterwards returning to their owne coun∣trey, reuolted, and wrote most cursed scandales and satyricall inuectiues against vs, and our Catholike faith, but for breui∣ties sake I will omit them. Moreouer, consider (I pray) this exactly, how long hath that land reiected and disallowed the Apostolike Romane religi∣on, and the syncere professors thereof: and how vehemently doth it now roote and ransacke it, and the zealous fauourers thereof? What land so much hindereth my procéedings, batte∣reth downe my title and supremacie, and ouerthroweth the glo∣rious fame and benediction of the Romane Church? What land so much vexeth and annoyeth my swéet and sugred sonne, Philip king of Spaine? What land so much helpeth and succoureth the king of Nauerre fighting now for the crowne of France,God giue him victorie ouer his e∣nemies, and quietly sta∣blish him in his kingdom a∣gainst the holy leaguers, my welbeloued children, and deuoted seruants? What land euerie kinde of wayes, standeth so stout∣ly and strongly against vs, and all our louing friends? Shall we harbour any inhabitants of that land? Shall we holder and succour such viperous broodes, and maintaine such rascall here∣tiques and libertines? No, no, Ferro & flamma perdamus,Note the stomack and splene of the Pope. let vs rather with fire and sword destroy them: let vs no longer affect and fancie that rebellious nation: yea (noble Cardinals) let vs go vpon these adders and lions, and tread and trample them vn∣der our féete: let vs curbe and chastice them, and lay their honor in the dust: and in so doing, saluus erit Petrus: salua erit ecclesia catholica. Cardinall Allen séeing the Pope so malcontent, and in such extreame enuie and enimitie against him, and his countrymen, could no longer be silent, but this roundly vnlaced his mind. Now do I find that true, which I counted but for a fable, that the greatest clearkes be not commonly the wisest men. Now I sée that to be an oracle,Polycraticon Iohannis Sa∣lisburiensis. lib. 6. cap. 26. which heretofore I thought but a méere cauill, that Roma non tam matrem exhibet, quàm nouercam: Rome sheweth herselfe not so much a naturall mother, as a stepmother, spoiling and deuouring her children, when they thinke she most liketh and loueth them. Now do I know by ex∣perience, those words to be infallible veritie, which that fa∣mous
and learned doctour Erasmus vsed, speaking of the aun∣swere of Pope Innocentius vnto the councel of Carthage.Inter Epist. August. Epist. 91. Eras. In hac Epistola, & dictionem, & ingenium, & eruditionem, tali Praesule dignam, cogimur desyderare. In this Epistle, we misse both elo∣quence and wit, and learning, méete for such a Prelate. . O miserie of mankind, I would my head were full of water, and mine eyes a fountaine of teares. Is iu∣stice now turned to wormewood, good vnto euill, swéete vnto sowre, and light into darknesse? Are Catholikes become cy∣nickes, Prelates become Pilates, Philosophers become , and religious men become irreligious? Are small théeues (ac∣cording to Socrates) led of great théeues to the gallowes? and are the verie heads and pillers of the church themselues drowned in corruption, and infected with manie pestilent dis∣eases? Why then, Nec Petrus, nec Paulus, quid ergo restat? Neither Peter nor Paul will helpe, what shall we doe? And must the English Catholikes be banished,They are iustly serued if they be so. that haue forsaken their countrey, their goods, and friends, for the Romaine faith? Must they be expelled, who haue béene as faithfull, louing, and trustie seruants to the sea of Rome, as anie other nati∣on whatsoeuer? And must they be exiled that haue aduentu∣red their liues,If you had bene good subiects, you might haue liued at home. and hazarded themselues into millions of daungers for their zeale to their mother church, and to the pro∣fessours thereof? Then let the Spanish, the French, the Irish, and the Scottish Catholikes be likewise exiled and pact out of Rome: for they are as iustly to be thus vsed as we, and as lawfully to be banished as we are, and this I will proue. But Quidlibet est quodlibet in suo genere (as the Logicians say:) therefore I will first of all aunswere the reasons that haue béene obiected against vs by my high Lord and bishop, least in saying nothing I should séeme to consent, and so be con∣uicted. The Cardi∣nall doth be∣stir himselfe to defend himselfe, & his countri∣men.The principall and chiefest thing that is laid against vs, is the woman Pope, Dame Ioane, who maketh no more against vs, then Laterane church doth when it hath one English man, or two in it. What though she was an English woman? (and yet it is doubtfull whether she was so or no.) What though
she was brought vp in mans apparrell? What though she was Pope of Rome, with child, and deliuered thereof in procession? What spot and crime is this to vs? What cause of banishment (I pray you heartely?) can we heale the sore or quiet the slaunder? Hath it béene in our power to remedie the euill and asswage the mischiefe? Was not she fiue hundred yeares and more before this our time? Then truely, truely, we are for that no more to be banished then the French are, because their ancetours were sometime like to spoile and sacke the Capitoll: or the Italians are, because Petrus the head Captaine of the citie of Rome, with two Consuls and twelue Aldermen, and diuers other nobles, gathering their powers togither, laid hands vpon Pope Iohn the fourtéenth, in the church of Laterane, and clapt him in prison eleuen monethes. Whereas it is farther obiected, that our kinges, Magistrates, and rulers, haue contemned and vilified the holy sea of Rome, and haue verie ill entreated the Popes themselues, with their Legates and faithfull seruants, and that none of our countrie haue done such seruice, fealtie, and obedience to this blessed chair of Peter, as it was meete and requisite for them: I will proue the contrarie, and that by such cléere and euident testimonies, that you shal sée the obiections against vs, flie away as the night clouds before the sunne. What one of all our kings, before the time of king Henrie the eight, but did fauour and forti∣fie the holy Sea of Rome, did homage and duetifull obedience to it, and princely and honourablie fought in defence of it, a∣gainst the Turkes and Infidels, and all other aduersaries whatsoeuer? What a famous and singular king was Edgar? What a worthy maintainer of the catholike faith & doctrine? He builded for religious monks 48, monasteries, or (as some report) as many as be sundayes in the yeare. Did not king Iua after he had ruled the West Saxons 37. yeares go to Rome, and be∣come a Monk, resigning his kingdom to Ethelardus his Nephew?These kings became Monkes. Did not the Quéene also Ethelburga become an Abbesse, ledde thereto with great and pure deuotion? Did not Ethereldus of Mercia, Kemedus of Mercia, Offa of East Saxons, Selly of
East Saxons, and Sigebertus king of East Angles, do the like? Haue not manie Queenes, and kings daughters with other noble women become Nunnes, for the zeale and loue they had to the Apostolique faith of Rome? as Hilda, Ercheirgoda with her sister Ermenilda,These Queens be∣came nūnes. Edelberga, Werburga, Kinreda, & Kinswi∣da her sister, Elfleda, with many others. What shall I tell you of king Canutus, who went to this holy citie on pilgrimage, and founded here an hospital for English pilgrims, and had such loue and heartie affection to it, that he gaue to the Pope many preci∣ous gifts, and burthened his land with a yearely tribute, called the Romeshot. I could tell you of many mo, but for breuitie I will ouerslip them. What shall I speake of many other excel∣lent men which England hath nourished and fostered, who haue refused no paines, and forsaken no perils for the glorie and ad∣uauncement of the Sea Apostolique of Rome?He wrote a book against him, called Opus scintillae∣rum. Weakly and simplie God knoweth, as is to be seen. Traitors and conspirators. Shall I tell you of Lanfrancus bishop of Canterburie, that confuted the Sa∣cramentarie heresie of Berengarius: of the learned Abbot Petrus Cluniacensis, that conuicted the doctrine of the Peterbrusians: of Thomas Walden, a most learned man, that wrote against Wickliffe: of the holie Bishop Fisher, that learnedly refuted Lu∣ther, & Oecolampadius? Shall I tel you of Cardinal Poole, Gar∣diner, Martin, and of others of later memorie, as Saunders, Cope, Bristow, Dorman, Parsons, Morton, and of an hundred more, all which haue beene such worthie proctours, and singular champi∣ons for the Catholike religion, that no other Countrey hath yéelded and brought forth the like? For as that nation first re∣ceiued the fayth from Rome, so those which are not fallen into the damnable beresies of the Hugonetes, and other secrataries, do reuerence and obey the same, and for their conscience will a∣bide any crosse and tribulation whatsoeuer. Saint Eleutherius Pope and Martyr, the first Apostle of Brytaine, preached in that land by Damianus & Fugatius, within little more then 100. yéers after Christs death. Gregorie the great, that holie Pope, caused to be preached to the English nation, by Augustinus, Melitus, and other holy priestes: although the gospellers that be there now denie this, and say, that as well the report of Eleutherius, as also of Augustine, that the one was the first Apostle of the
Brittaines, the other of the English is vntrue: and blindly hold, that ye faith was not first preached there by them,the Gospel came into England frō the East, and not from Rome. but either by Io∣seph of Arimathaea, or by S. Paul the Apostle passing that way in∣to Spaine, or by Simon Zelotes, or by the Gréeks, or some others. But the English only you say, and none but they do hinder and annoy your sacred and ghostly procéedings, and also subuert the good and gracious attempts of all your friends & most loyall children. What is this to vs? They are gone from vs, they are not of vs, they are none of our fold, they are giuen ouer to Sa∣than: we haue forsaken them, we haue no societie with them, we defie, damnifie & detest them: we reuolt not, nor once so much as wauer: we stick wholly and solely,A verie hote and earnest proctor. firmly & fréely to the auncient Romane doctrine, and so we will do, come life, come death, come heauen, come hell, come fire, come sword, come any crosse or losse whatsoeuer. Shal we be for this our loue & tender affection reie∣cted? shal we be lopped off frō this fruteful vine, as vnprofitable & vnsauerie branches? shall we be banished, and yet iustly conui∣cted of no crime or offence that deserueth it? If we be, we must take it patiently: but truly we will say and say againe, iniusta nouerca: summum ius summa iniuria, an vnnaturall mother: great right, great iniurie. The Pope perceiuing his vehement allega∣tions, & his tediousnesse therein, interrupted him with this chat. Cease thy babling (Cardinal:) leaue off thy ands and ifs, & tittle tattles I know not what: iwis, all not worth a blue point: much a do and litle helpe, fat féeding and leane cattell. Hei misero pingui macer est tibi taurus in aruo. Thou kickest against the pricke, and castest water into the sea, and shewest thy selfe not a Cardinall but a caitife, not a ca∣tholicke but a schismaticke, not an obedient child,A graue and discreet rea∣soning of a Pope. but a bastardly and beggerly brat, so much to canuasse and cancell my words, to spurne at my celestiall and lawfull procéedings, and to go about to repel and obliterate my good purpose and determination. Hast thou forgotten nosce teipsum, know thy selfe? Hast thou cleane ab∣iured my maiestie and authoritie, my bell, booke and candle? Can I erre or be deceiued, or vtter any thing that is not legitimate & hallowed? What shall I say to him, reuerend Cardinals? nay what shall I not say to him? But I sée his infirmitie, therefore I
wil say no more to him, but do the déed. What say you to it? speak shortly togither: are not the English lawfully to be banished? The Cardinals forthwith replied: what more lawful and right? That which pleaseth your holinesse is autentique, and not to be any longer vrged or denied: your wil be done here in earth, as it is in heauen & Purgatorie.The English banished frō Rome. Sarci∣nas colligite Angli. Thē quoth the Pope, Sic volo, sic iubeo, I will & command it so, but after this manner. Let proclamation now presently be made in all parts of this citie, that al English Catholikes of what state or calling soeuer they be, whether they be men, womē, or children, do come to morow to S. Peters church, by nine of the clock in the forenoone, there to heare solemn masse, & afterwards to depart away with bag & baggage, & such goods as they haue, into such countries as they shall thinke best: but not to inhabite or remaine within Italie, or any prouince therof, vpon paine of my curse & farther displeasure.Notable pil∣lers of the Pope indeed The Cardinals answe∣red, Blessed are your words, & supernatural be your cogitations: your diuine commandement with al reuerence shalbe executed. So the Pope arose, & went to his Pallace, but the Cardinals tar∣ried somwhat longer behind, taking order for the proclamation: which being done, they went to their lodgings, & Cardinal Allen with his accustomed guard went to his, where we wil leaue him maruellously distempered, yet somewhat busily occupied in ma∣king readie his trunkes, his Mules, & other necessaries for ye next day. The Proclamation being published, good God how ye English Catholiks maruelled & muttered at it, not knowing what should be the cause therof.The English greatly grie∣ued with their banish∣ment. Some wept for sorrow, some raged and rored like men at their wits end, some fell sicke for sorrow, & euery one was not a little dismaied, taking it both hardly & heauily. Great was their griefe, strange was their crie, & wonderfull their com∣plaint: and one aboue the rest, contemning the Pope, & not broo∣king the iniurie, tooke his pen in hand, and wrote these verses, and cast them that night into the Popes Pallace. Papè, proh papa perut pax, palma pudor{que}: Praepinguis perstat princeps, pastor{que} peculí. Pseudopapa procul properato, pontificales Putres pessunda, prospecta, ponito pyris. Protomysta pedes premito, pampilla, paletum,
Pausa paulisper, panchresta{que} prouida phraende. Proijce prosedas, pressuras, proditiones, Praelia praesertim, praerancida pragmata passim. Posterga (praesul) phantasmata, pulpita, pupas, Picturas, pedicas, putorem, praestigias{que}, Pellito praesignem pompam, popas{que}, popinas, Pestiferam petram, peltam, patinas{que} phalernum, Pro praedis prauis, plenas persoluito poenas. Proh, pestes, praxim, pugnas píceas{que} propulsa, Posce preces puras, pietatem porrige puram. Plebeis populis praesis, prosis{que} potentèr. Pensicula plagas Papatus, proluuium{que}: Pasce pecus planè, plenè pete praedia petri. Portentosa patris postmitte piacula Pluti. Propitio placido pro pneumaete, pace precare. An other also being as malecontent as the former, wrote these Sapphickes folowing Sancte Grégori potius sceleste, Turges Grégori (malesane papa,) Perperàm tanta rabie, furore, Bile, Britannis? Quod scelus (quaeso) facinus quod illis? Non tui Serui fuerint fideles? Exulant ergo sine lege Roma Pignora chara? Tun' fidem Petri retines beatam? Tun' tenes petram cathedram{que} Petri? Vanitas. sellam Sathanae superbi Iure capessis. Iure tu Daemon, Deus ipse nullo Iure: pessundas, violas{que} iura: Iura quae toto Dominus colenda Tradidit orbe. Roma Grégori fugiemus? Esto. An tuos Anglos relegabis? Esto. Tunc vale scortum Babilonis, (excors Papa) valeto.
When the next daie was come wherin they should appeare in Saint Peters church, they (according to their holy fathers commandement) resorted thereto, and there heard diuine masse, offering to our Ladie and to Saint George,Babble a good, or else neither S. George nor our Lady wil heare you. Cardinall Allēs oratiō to his coun∣trimen. and praying them, that they would chaunge and conuert the minde of the Pope, that they might continue in their Colledge and places as they had done tofore. When they had so done, Cardinal Allen called them together and spake thus: I neede not tell you (my deare and louing countrimen) what the cause is, that we are com∣maunded hither. You knowe I am sure by the proclamation yesterdaie, that we are this daie to be banished, according to the edict and decree of our holy Lord, Gregorie the xiiij. and his Cardinalles: the cause why (I promise you faithfully) I know not, neither any of you do know, as I coniecture: which is no smal griefe and dolor vnto vs: what shall we do (good countri∣men?) Can you inuent no waie to remedie the matter, or at least to pacifie it for a while vntill farther deliberation? They answered, we know none. Then (quoth the Cardinall) what say you to this? Some of the grauest and most substantial of you shall goe with a Supplication to our holy father. VVe are con∣tent, said they, if it maie any whit further vs. You shall (quoth the Cardinall) carie with you a thousand Florens,A Florene is an Italian crowne, of the value of iiij. s. vj. d. ste. Roma dat om∣nia, omnia dantibus. and be∣stow it vpon his holinesse: three hundred of the which I my selfe will giue, and the rest shall be collected among you. This much we will not onely now, but yearly hereafter giue vnto him, so that we maie haue licence and security here to inhabite, and this (no doubt) will doe the deede, and accomplish our desire. Iacta est alea (sayd they) we like it well, let it be per∣fourmed. Then they gathered the mony, and did put it together, and went with it to the Pope, and gaue him their supplication, the tenour wherof was after this maner. The English mens suppli∣cation to the Pope.In most humble and obedient wise complaine vnto your holi∣nesse, your poore afflicted and desolate seruants the English Catholiques. VVheras it hath pleased your Highnesse, together with your reuerend Cardinals for to renounce vs, to pronounce vs exiles and banished, & to cause a proclamation therof yester∣day to be published, that we shold all this day appeare at S. Pe∣ters
church by nine of the clocke, and from thence directly to take our passage: we haue accōplished (as we are most bounden) your good and gracious commandement, and we are all there present to attend your pleasure & authoritie. May it please you to haue some fatherly pitie and compassion vpon vs, that are far from our natiue countrey, and to tender our cases so much, that we may cō∣tinue as we haue done heretofore, or else haue some lōger abode within your holy citie of Rome. VVe offer our selues prostrate vnder the féet of your holinesse with all that we are,Wonderfull submission in the English. and that we haue. Saue vs, kill vs, call vs, recall vs, approue vs, reproue vs, as you shall please: your voice (the voice of Christ in you spea∣king) we will acknowledge and reuerence: if we haue deserued exile, we are contented: if death shall be layd vpon vs, it shall be most swéet and welcome: whatsoeuer your pleasure and arbitre∣ment is or shalbe of vs, we recken it an heauenly felicitie. VVe haue brought with vs a thousand Florens to bestow vpon your holinesse: and we haue all agréed, consented and concluded toge∣ther, to pay so much yearly vnto you, if so be we may haue your sacred licence & permission to remaine within this Citie. Accept therfore we beséech you, this our petition: weigh and ponder our estate in an equall ballance: let not the sentence of banishment go against vs: and in so doing, you shall find vs as true & faithful vnto you, & as louing & trusty children, as any nation in Europe. VVhen the Pope had séene this supplication, and perceiued the thousand Florens, that they would then presently and yearly af∣ter giue vnto him: Bos in lingua,The Florens pacified the Popes anger. his anger was somewhat miti∣gated, and the sound and profound father was wholly satisfied. For the Florens were the fragrant flowers that he desired, the Saints that he honored, the fishes that he angled for, and ye texts of scripture that he studied vpon: yet to colour and cloke the mat∣ter he spake this roundly vnto them. My friends, your sute is cold, & your petition in vaine.Note the hi∣pocrisie of the Pope. That which hath bene ratified, confirmed, and concluded by me and my Cardinals, cannot eftsoones be interdicted, or dissolued, Sic Petrus, sic iubet Ecclesia: there is now no remedie. Facta transacta omnia: The tide is past, & the market ended: yet because you shal know that I am your soueraigne Lord and gouernor, & one that would
gather his children togither, as the hen doth her chickēs, stay here a while, & I wil send with you one of my Secretaries to the rest of your companie, and he shal declare vnto you more amply and fully my will, pleasure, and determination. So he caused one of his Secretaries to come vnto him, & taking him aside, he shewed him his intent and purpose concerning the English Catholikes, willing & commanding him to go with them to S. Peters church, to receiue their money, & to giue them a quietus est, a full pardon and remission of their sinnes, and permission to returne againe to their houses and mansions. The Secretary went with them, and vttered this solemne Oration vnto them. The Secre∣taries orati∣on to the English men.My deare frends and good brethren, cōfort your selues, & be of good chéere: for the case I can tell you is altered, & you are againe receiued into fauor & benedictiō. How highly is God to be praised for that he hath prouided for his flock so good a shepherd, & for his Church so wise & prudent a Pastor as Gregorie is. How greatly are you bound to him, who being Christs vicar & chiefe deputie, Peters successor,A worthy substitute, & clawback for the Pope. the Doctor of all Doctors, the father of al fathers, and the master & teacher of all the world, so graciously prouideth for the health and welfare of his seruants, and carefully séeketh to aduance and promote the Catholike Romaine religion. O how louely and louingly doth he tender the cases of you English Ca∣tholikes, & how mercifully hath he dealt with you? He hath pardo∣ned your offences, and forgiuen your transgressions, he hath sent me vnto you with his quietus est, with his Indulgence, and full absolution of your sinnes, yea, and with his sacred fauour & tol∣leration to remaine in your former places and habitations. Therefore Alleluya, praise ye our Lord: returne backe again, and do your duties accordingly. Hauing ended this spéech, the Englishmen thinking to haue an explodite, gaue a great plaudite, and said,The English returne to their vomite and to their wallowing in the myre. Viuat Gregorius, Dominus Deus noster. The secretarie receiued the Florens, and tooke his leaue of them, returning to the swéete side of blessed Gregorie: the English fugitiues retur∣ned backe againe with no smal ioy and contentation, being very shortly afterwards sworne againe to the Romaine faith, and commanded to fast twice a wéeke in remembrance thereof, for the space of seauen yeares. FINIS.
THE ANATOMIE OF POPE IOANE, VVHEREIN HER LIFE, MANERS and death is liuely layd abrode and opened, and the forged cauils and allegations, that our aduersaries vse for her, throughly vn∣ripped and confuted: Necessarie for all those that are not fully acquainted vvith the storie, and not vnfrutefull to all them that loue and embrace the true religion of Christ, and abhorre the sottish illusions of Romish Antichrist. printer's or publisher's device ANCHORA SPEI Imprinted at London by Richard Field dwelling in the Blacke-friers neare Ludgate. 1591.
TO THE REASONA∣BLE READER. THou hast here mine Anatomie of Pope Ioane briefly com∣prised: if not cunningly as it ought, blame mine insufficien∣cie: if not as an expert Chirurgian, impute the fault to want of skill, and not of good will. Howbeit, errare fortassis possim, haere∣ticus esse non possum. The matter hereof is so manifest, that cornu co∣piae were needlesse to polish it, and the truth so euident, that the Pumi-stone of exquisit and superficiall eloquence wold not haue bene requisit to flourish and smooth it. Reade therfore willingly, iudge indifferently, and correct friendly. Let reason rule thee, authoritie moue thee, and truth enforce thee. And let vs both pray together, that the truth may be maintained, all errors confounded, and Gods name glorified. Fare-well.
THE ANATOMIE OF POPE IOANE. CHAP. I. How our aduersaries the Papists are ashamed of Pope Ioane, and how some of them do peremptorily denie the story there∣of. AS the scriptures are plaine to proue, the doctours and learned fathers plentifull to testifie: so manie and great are the signes and tokens which the Lord from time to time hath shewen, that Rome is Babilon, the Pope Antichrist, the abhominati∣on of desolation, the archenimy of Christ,2. Thess. 2.4. and that man of sinne, which lifteth himselfe aboue all that is called God. Among which none surely is more liuely and euident, and more to be weighed and considered, then that of Pope Ioane, which is such a notable president and singular demonstration thereof, that no man (vnlesse wholly possessed of sathan, and a verier beast then euer was Nabuchadnezar) will doubt or put any diffidence therein. This is that which is the onely eyesore, and biting corasiue to our aduersaries, which pulleth downe their proud peacocks feathers, and battereth their paper wals cleane to the ground. This is that which grieueth them to the gaules, and pricketh them to the quicke, which ouerwhelmeth them with horrour, and drowneth them top and taile in shame and dishonour.Euseb. lib. 10. cap. 14. Supe∣rati pudore, & adoperti cōfu∣sione discedunt. For as the shamefull and detestable end of Ar∣rius, was such a terrour and cooling card to his adherents, that they went away husht, ouercome with shame, and couered with confusion: so the straunge euent of Pope Ioane and her oppro∣brious death, is such a torment and torture vnto them, that in
their owne consciences they are stinged and accused, and com∣pelled to crye:Esay. 1.21. Quomodo facta est meretrix vrbs fidelis? How is that faithfull Citie become a strumpet?Anton. Par 2. Tit. 16. cap. 1.7 Antoninus the Archbi∣shop of Florence, when he had opened this whole storie of Pope Ioane, was so astonied with the straungenesse and admiration of the matter, that he cryed out: O altitudo Sapientiae, & Scien∣tiae Dei: quam incredibilia sunt iudicia eius? O the depth of the wisedome and knowledge of God, how incredible be his iudge∣mentes? A story wri∣ter, liuing in the time of king Edward the sonne of Egelred, and Emma. See Maria∣nus printed at Basill, collu∣ma. 407. Sub anno dom. 854. The author corrupted. Psal. 145.17.Marianus Scotus, perceiuing what a déepe downfall and ruine this brought to the Sea of Rome, and that God would haue such a matter openly knowne, to the euerlasting detestation both of the person and place, writeth thus: Propter turpitudinem rei, & muliebrem sexum, Authores Pontificij huius Iohannae nomen non po∣nunt. Both for the shame of the matter, and also for the woman kind, the Popish Chronicles leaue out the name of Pope Ioane. Can there be a more manifest tokē then this, both of great cor∣ruption of manners, and of dissolution of life? Can there be a more infallible argument of open horror and filthinesse, in that onely Sea aboue all others? Surely, surely, the Lord is righ∣teous in all his wayes, and holy in all his workes, and all his iudgements are done in truth and equitie. But our aduersaries haue a figgeleafe to couer this shame, and thinke by that, to shift and face out the matter, and to passe away inuisible in a cloude. They flatly deny that there was euer any Pope Ioane in Rome,A proper fig∣leafe of our aduersaries to couer Dame Ioane yea they stoutly & sturdily defende it, and say, that it is a fond and vaine fable, a lye, and a tale inuented of malice & stomacke against them. Soft, and fayre, my Maisters: your figgeleafe is drie and withered, and not worth a rotten figge, for it doth vn∣couer your shame, shew your nakednesse, and bewray your tre∣cherie, and dastardnes in the cause. You can not bridle the flow∣ing Seas, nor blind the Sunne-beames, you haue as great an aduantage by the denying of it,Euseb. lib. 3.21 as the Ebionites had by denying S. Pauls Epistles, and calling him an Apostata of the law. But can you prooue it so? Alas you can not: for your owne Doctors and Proctors, haue written and related it so plainely and pi∣thily, that you must néedes (vnlesse you clippe their credites, and
deface them) confesse it.Iohan. 8. muli∣er vt fertur. Testimonies for the profe of Pope Ioan vt dicitur. Martinus Polonus the Popes Peniten∣tiarie, and a Monke of the order of Cisterce, who liued about the yeare of our Lord 1320. hath written and reported it: So hath Platyna in Iohanne 8. Sabellicus, Enneadis 9. lib. 1. Marianus Scotus. Rauisius Textor in Officina. Antoninus the Archbishop of Flo∣rence. Supplementum Chronicorum. Chronica Chronicorum. Fasci∣culus temporum, and others mo. Are all these lyars and tale tel∣lers? Are the writings of all these men fabulous and vntrue? I trust you will not say so. Then giue place vnto the trueth, and kicke not still against the spurre: for the truth is great,3. Esdr. 4. and will preuaile, and will ye, nill ye, it will conquere. Deny not such a miraculous token, shewing as it were in a glasse, the corrup∣tion and abhomination of the Romaine Church, and of the Pope thereof, the open aduersarie of God, and the abhomination stan∣ding in the holy place. Acknowledge and confesse it, and let the remembrance thereof worke such repentance and remorse in you, that you may renounce your errors, abiure your heresies, forsake the kingdom of darknesse, and serue the Lord in true ho∣linesse and righteousnesse. CHAP. II. How some of our aduersaries goe about to excuse and shift the matter, by possibility of nature, saying, that Pope Ioane might be Hermaphroditus, that is, a man and woman both in one. THe Lyon is knowne by his clawes, the Leoparde by his spots, and our aduersaries by their peruerse & corrupt dea∣ling to defend Pope Ioane, and to colour her filthinesse and abo∣mination withall: wherein as many of them haue toyled and moyled not a little, so especially hath one Cope our Countrey∣man, an earnest Proctor for the Pope and his Prelates, who writing of this matter, sayth thus: Neque hic ego quicquam dico de Hermaphroditis & ,Dialogo. 1. Pag. 47. de quibus veterum libri pleni sunt. I will here say nothing of such persons, as be called Hermaphroditi, and are both man and wo∣man all in one, whereof in old writers we find much mention. Meaning thus in effect, that ye Pope might be Hermaphoditus,
an Herkinalson, that is to say, a man and a woman both in one: and thinking by this meanes somwhat handsomly to excuse and shift the matter. Gentle stuffe for the nonce; and worthy diui∣nitie for such a Romaine courtier. What toy is there so vaine and ridiculous, and what excuse so childish and friuolous, which they will not force to serue their turne?Ouid. Meta. 4. Salmacis fons semiuiros facit. The Pope may be a man and a woman both in one verie likely, for he might perad∣uenture wash himselfe in the fountaine Salmacis in Caria, and be made halfe a man: or he might perchance embrace a woman as the Nymph did,Metam. 4.49. finding Hermaphroditus the sonne of Mer∣curius and Venus naked, and desire of the gods as she did, that of them two might be made one bodie. Is not this Catholike Theologie, and apostolike discipline méete for a Romaine cham∣pion? Is not this credible and to be iustified? Yes no doubt, for the Pope that is a God & aboue Angels, may transforme himself if it please him,Cor. Agrippade Occul. Philoso∣phia. lib. 1. cap. 45. as well as Proteus, Periclimenus, Achelous, and Metra the daughter of Erisichtho, and may & can do grea∣ter miracles then these: for in his hands is heauen, hell, and purgatorie, he hath all the earth at his commandement, all the saincts at his commandement, yea, and all the diuels too if néed be. Therefore a small matter it was for him, and the least mi∣racle of a thousand, to make himselfe a man and a woman both in one. What cursed doctrine is this? alas what a childish and sillie excuse is this, to couer Dame Ioanes infamie, and to bring her to some credite in the world? O miserable and phantasticall imaginations, of verie heathen Atheists & Apistes not allowed nor maintained. For shame, for verie conscience sake, for the regard of the world, and for feare of Gods heauie wrath, reiect such foolish dreames and ceremonies, and vphold no longer such blind and vaine excuses, in defence of that which is so well and perfectly knowne to the world, and which is such a cleare light, and plaine signification of sacriledge, superstition and idolatrie in the Romaine sea. Let not Antichrist any longer deceiue you, nor the Romish Babilon infect you with her poisoned cuppes.Ierem. 2.13. Damne not vp the springs of the water of life, nor breake vp puddles of your owne, such as are able to hold no water, but serue the Lord with feare, and reioice vnto him with reuerence;
embrace his word, loue him, and put your whole trust in him: then you shall be his people, and shéepe of his pasture, then your leafe shall not wither, yea and then looke whatsoeuer you shall doe, it shall prosper. CHAP. III. How some say, that the Pope being a man, may afterwardes be chaunged into a woman. GReat is the subtiltie, and merueilous is the craft that Sa∣than vseth to drowne men in heresie, to thrust them head∣long into sinne and perdition, and to make them obstinately wallow and welter therein. He will prouide for them such fine excuses: he will get for them such starting holes and defences, that they shall thinke themselues secure, to be in the right way, and to stande vpon good and firme ground, when it is farre otherwise: yea he will leaue no meanes vnassayed to kéepe them in his subiection, and to make them drunken with their owne erronious opinions. This may be perceiued in none more perspicuously then in the Papistes, and in no one thing more ap∣parantly, then in their defence of Pope Ioane, whom the diuell hath so bewitched, so blinded, and so wedded to their owne selfe∣willes, that to couer her deformitie, and to paint it out with some colour to the worlde, they haue spredde themselues againe as the heauens, and left no way vnattempted. Wherefore let vs goe further, and sée more of their dealing, and more of their fetches in the matter: and let vs come againe to Cope, and sée what a good and ghostly Master he is for his Dame Ioane. After he had sayd, that the Pope might be an Hermaphroditus; he re∣steth not there, but going further, he forceth Ouids Metamor∣phosis to serue his turne, and sayth, that the Pope being a man, may be chaunged into a woman: for these be his wordes. Et ne à nostri temporis memoria longius abeam, non ignoro monumentis li∣terarumesse traditum. Mulierem quandam nomine Aemyliam An∣tonio Spensae, Civi Eubulano nuptam, post duodecimum à nuptijs an∣num in virum transijsse. Legi etiam alteram multerem, vbi puerum peperisset, in marem fuisse mutatam.
But not to go farther then the remembrance of our owne time: I know that it is written that a certaine woman named Emylia, married vnto one Antonius spensa a Citizen of Eubulum, ten yeares after she had bene married, was turned into a man. I haue likewise read of another woman, that whē she had bene brought a bed, afterwards became a man. Certes this is strange for a man to be turned into a woman: but all things well considered, it is nothing strange at all. For the Pope hath all lawes and know∣ledge within his brest, and whatsoeuer he be, he is holy, and im∣maculate, and can worke no smal wonders. May not he change himselfe into sundrie shapes, as wel as Iupiter, Mercurie, Apol∣lo, and other of the Gods? May not he be changed into a woman as well as Tiresias was:Metam. lib. 3. Pontanus. or as well as Caietana and Aemilia into men? Yes doubtlesse, for he is farre aboue them, and can do much more then euer they could. Therefore master Copes surmise, that the Pope may be changed into a woman, is verie Catholike and substantiall, and fit for such a pregnant and illu∣minate doctour. But fie for shame, what a sottish excuse is this? VVhat a vaine illusion and Maygaine? Is there no better shift nor surer refuge then this? Is there no thicker cloud to spread ouer the matter with more likelihood? Then who séeth not the bondage of Egypt: who sées not the spirituall Babilon, and the madnesse of them that commit spirituall fornication with her? Better it had béene, and the safer way by a great deale, simplie and plainly to haue confessed it, then by a myracle to turne the Pope from a man into a woman, and that which is worst of all, obstinately to defend it. For now euerie one doth sée, that you had leifer be filthie still, then leaue off your filthinesse, and had rather (because you loue your vices) Excusare, quàm excutere, Excuse them, then forsake them: and as many as in spirite and truth do loue the Lord, do mourne for griefe, to sée men carried so headlong with such godlesse and retchlesse imaginations.
CHAP. IIII. How they haue left out Pope Ioanes name out of their Calendar: and how they haue hired Onuphrius Pamuinius of set purpose to face out the matter. SOme of our aduersaries take this Enthememe for an infalli∣ble argumēt:An Enthe∣meme of our aduersa∣ries to denie Pope Ioane. Dame Ioane is not registred in ye Calēdar among the Popes: Ergo it is but a vaine fable that euer dame Ioane was Pope in Rome. The consequent is very simple, & not to be gran∣ted, because it is well knowne, that the bishops names as wel in Rome, as in other places, haue vpon sundrie occasions béene of∣tentimes quite striken out of the Calendar. But dame Ioanes name (they say) is not in their Calendar. It may be so: & wher∣fore I pray? Martinus Polonus, one of their owne sworne bro∣thers, doth tell vs. Iohanna (saith he) non ponitur in Catalogo Pon∣tificum tā propter muliebrē sexum, quàm propter deformitatē facti. Pope Ioane is not reckoned in the Calendar of the holy Popes, as wel for that she was a womā, as also for very shame of the matter. The like doth Sabellicus set downe.Ennead. 9. lib. 1 Pag. 469. Nullus defunctae honor ha∣bitus: fama tenet, ob tam foedae rei memoriam. There was no honour bestowed at her buriall: the report is, for the remembrance of her filthie act. By this we sée, that the name of Pope Ioane was not put into the Calendar of the Popes, partly because she was a womā, & specially, because she was a womā of such a filthy life, & vicious behauiour.In Scholijs in Platynam. Therfore this reason of our aduersaries is a blind coniecture, & of no force. But (they say) Onuphrius Pam∣uinius vpon Platina, hath truely & learnedly written hereof: & he that list to read that discourse of his, shal easily beléeue the whole matter to be fabulous. Truth it is, that such a one indéede hath of late written thereof, and beaten his braines not a little to helpe out this matter, but all in vaine: for he was one of the Popes Parasites, hired and procured by him onely for that businesse. His booke was printed in Venice, and plausiblie accep∣ted of his friends and welwillers: but the stuffe that he hath brought in there, to make the world beléeue, that there was neuer any Pope Ioane in Rome, is such trash & so ridiculous, that it will grieue a good Christian in his heart, to read and sée it.
Quid non mentiri, vel quid non protinus audet Fingere mortale ingenium, vt sibi maior eundi In praeceps pateat via, liberior{que} potestas Peccandi detur, minus & peccata pudoris In se contineant? This is the craft and policie of the Pope, to hire & procure men to smooth and sooth his matters, and to face and grace out his im∣pieties, with many forged lies & false suppositions: thinking by that meanes, to dazel mens eyes, and to make them beléeue they be true, godly, and apostolical. This haue many popish Pages of late done,Most impu∣dent and no∣torious rai∣lers and liers and especially Amphilochius, Onuphrius, Surius, and Hieronimus Bolsecus, one that hath vsed most shamelesse ray∣ling, most vile, spiteful, and horrible lies and cauils, with an im∣moderate and vnciuile bitternesse, procéeding from the vnsaue∣rie and vnquiet humour of his heart, against the godly and re∣uerend ministers of the gospel, Caluin, Beza, with others moe. God of his mercie graunt, that they may repent and amend their liues, renounce their damnable errors, forsake their cursed slan∣ders, and not aduenture their wits in such desperate causes. For, Nemo periculosiùs peccat, quàm qui peccata defendit. No mā sinneth with more danger, then he that standeth in defence of sinne. CHAP. V. VVhat yeare of the Lord Pope Ioane liued in Rome. How long she was Pope: and betweene what Popes she was. Herodotus.XErxes the great king of Persia, when he brought ouer his huge armie into Grecia, sent out his letters of defiance, vnto the great mount Athos that is in Macedonia, and com∣manded him to stand still, and not to stirre a foote, nor to worke any displeasure, either to himselfe, or to his armie. Euen by like authoritie, and with as good discretion, the Pope and his hyrelinges, haue done with dame Ioane, who being able no kind of way, to colour or cloake her sufficiently, haue sent out their letters and defiance to all Countreyes and Regions that per∣fectly knowe her, commanding them not once to spurne or kicke against her, nor so much as to make any record or mention of
her. But let them wrastle and wrangle so much as they will, let them curse & defie while they list, and let Onuphrius, and all the rabble rout of them do what they can, the truth thereof will ne∣uer be forgotten: it is and will be absolutely knowne, to the vt∣ter confusion of proud Antichrist, and to the euerlasting execra∣tion of all the popish and péeuish synagogues. For although they haue left the name of Pope Ioane out of the Calendar of the bi∣shops of Rome, onely for shame,What the cause was, that they haue left Pope Ioane out of their Calendar. least it should appeare in re∣cords that a woman, & such a woman had béene bishop of Rome, or that the bishop of Rome had béene with child: and although they neuer cease to bolster and bungle vp the matter, sometime with this shift, sometime with that, sometime affirmatiuely, sometime negatiuely: yet so many Chronicles would not haue recorded it, nor so many mē would haue written it, nor ye world would so vniuersally haue beléeued these things of yt Pope, more then of any other, had it not beene true, credible, and veritie. For where I pray begā the history of her first? In Rome. From what place was it first published abroad into the world? From Rome. What be they that haue written and declared it? The trustie friends of Rome: yea the great autenticall doctours and com∣missioners of the Pope, haue described and auouched it, some li∣uing foure hundred yeares agoe, some fiue hundred, who haue euer béene counted famous fathers in Rome, and worthy of no small authoritie and reuerence. What yeare of our Lord was dame Ioane Pope in Rome? As they haue written, 853. How long was she in the Popedome? As they haue written, two yeares, one moneth, and foure dayes. Betwixt what Popes was she? As they themselues haue written, betwéene Leo the fourth, and Benedict the third. Séeing then that our aduersa∣ries owne friends and Proctours haue written and related it, and so plainly and expresly shewen it, I maruell much with what faces any of them can denie it, or go about to excuse it.
CHAP. VI. What Pope Ioanes name was, how she was not borne in England, but at Mentz in Germanie, and how she came to Rome, and to the Popedome. MAny there be (I know) and those our owne countrimen, who thinke and beléeue dame Ioane to be an English wo∣man borne. I can coniecture no other thing to be the cause here∣of but report onely, being for the most part more common then true,The cause why Pope Ioane is thought to be an Eng∣lish woman borne. and especially because in manie authors entreating of this matter, is found, Iohannes Anglicus, or Iohannes de Anglia, which séemeth vnto them to be translated, Iohn an English man, or Iohn of England. Because I would haue all those that be not as yet truely certified and resolued herein, to agrée togither and right∣ly to beleeue this point, I will declare vnto them the truth of the matter,Why she was called Ioane English. according to the opinions of the best and most approued writers. She was called Ioane English by the surname of her fa∣ther, and borne at Mentz in Germany. Martinus Polonus the Popes ghostly Penitentiarie, discoursing at large of this matter affirmeth the same, for thus he writeth. Iohannes Anglicus, na∣tione Maguntinus, sedit annos duos, mensem vnum, dies quatuor, &c. Iohn English (so surnamed) borne at Mentz, sate in the Romaine Sea two yeares, one moneth, and foure dayes. Theodoricus Nie∣mus also, sometime the Popes Secretarie, and therefore had good cause to know the truth hereof, doth liuely paint out the whole matter, and expresly sheweth the same. Et fuit mulier de Maguntia nata, quae studuit Athenis sub virili habitu: & in tantum profecit in artibus, vt tandem veniens Romam per biennium in schola Artes liberales legerit: & adeo sufficiens fuit, vt etiam Maiores & Nobiles vrbis eius lectiones frequenter audiuerint. Et postea eligitur in Papam &c. And there was Ioane a woman, borne at Mentz, and had stu∣died at Athens in the apparell of a man, and had so profited in the Artes, that at last comming to Rome, two yeares together she professed the liberall Sciences in a Schoole. And her gift in teach∣ing was such, that the Elders and Nobles of the Citie resorted of∣ten to heare her reade. Afterward she was chosen Pope, &c. We
néede not cite any more testimonies for farther proofe hereof:Pope Ioane a Dutchwo∣man borne. these two doe manifestly shewe, that she was a Dutchwoman borne, and not called Ioane English by the name of the Coun∣trey, for that she was an English woman borne in England (as many imagine) but only by the surname of her father. For who knoweth nor that there are many at this day called by ye names of Scot, Irish, French, Welsh, Norman, Gascoyne Holland, and yet not borne in any of these Countries, but onely in Eng∣lande. Therefore it is true, and without all doubt, that Pope Ioane was not borne in England but in Germany. Notwith∣standing some there be (whose authoritie is verie credible and sufficient) that say her name was Gilberta,Her right name was Gilberta, but called Ioane the eight. Pope Ioane was a studēt at Athens. and called Ioan the eight: who likewise affirme, that she was a Dutch-woman of Mentz, and went with an English Monke, out of the Abbey of Fulda to Athens, in mans apparell. Well, truth it is, that she was in the young yeares of a girle brought to Athens, by one that was her louer in mans apparell. There she studied, and profited so much in diuerse sciences, that none were found to be compared with her. This is not straunge,Women brought vp in mens ap∣parell, and taken for men. nor much to be marueiled at: For Rauisius Textor in Officina, writeth the like of one Marina, that dissembling what she was, liued many yeres in an Abbey as a Monke: & of Lasthenia, Axiothea, and others, that being women, came into the Schoole in mans apparell to heare Plato. The like doth many others write of Euphrosyna that ho∣ly mayde, that dwelt 36.Pope Ioane came to Rome. She was cre∣ated Pope of Rome. Her behaui∣our in that high office. A most liue∣ly president of the who∣rish Sea. yeares in Monkes apparell among Monkes, and was neuer otherwise taken then for a Monke. From Athens shee came to Rome, and there professed learning openly, and had great Doctors to her Schollers, and for opinion of learning and good life by one consent of all, was made Pope: being in this high and glorious seate, she behaued her selfe so orderly, and discharged that supernall office so abso∣lutely, that she was with child, and as she went in Procession deliuered thereof, and so dyed. Thus was the Pope of Rome, who is such a parls fellowe that he can not erre, a woman with child, deliuered in procession, dead openly in the stréetes, and bu∣ried without any honour or solemnitie. God giue all Christians grace by this example to beware of the Antichristian and Ba∣bylonicall
Pope, to renounce him, and all his errors, to reiect him and all his Parasites, and to sée the trueth and that blessed hope wherevnto they haue béene called, so as they may glorifie him alone, who is the true God, and also that same Iesus Christ whom he sent downe to vs from heauen, to whom with the Fa∣ther, and the holy Ghost be giuen all honour and glorie euerla∣stingly, Amen. FINIS.
