21002A S115926 44920403 16402
THE Second Tome of the Trauailes and aduen∣tures of Don Simonides, enterlaced with varietie of Historie, wherein the curteous and not curious Reader, maie finde matters so leueled, as maie suffice to please all humours. For malancholie men, they shall not neede to saile to Anticera, for here they shall finde plea∣saunt expulsiues. For merrie myndes, sober dis∣courses to preuent excesse. For deuoute, whole∣some lessons to confirme their contempla∣tiō. For al sortes, such delightes as nei∣ther alow of daliaunce, nor discom∣mende honest pleasure. Wri∣tten by Barnabe Riche, Gentleman. Malui me diuitem esse quam vocari. ¶ Imprinted at London for Ro∣bert Walley, dwellyng in Paules Churchyard. 1584,
To the Right hono∣rable my very good Maister Sir Christopher Hatton Knight, Captaine of her Maiesties Guard, Ʋicechamber∣laine to her Highnesse, and one of her Maiesties moste honorable priuie Counsaile. NOw at length (Right honourable) our Simonides hath finisht his Journey, he hath visited Rome, seen Na∣ples, beheld Athens, sailed into Englande, ouer vewed bothe Court and Countrey, and in conclusion re∣turned into Ciuill. Amongst his cheefest freendes, J as one priuie to his conceiptes, haue determined the publishyng of his trauailes, and dedicated them vnder your honourable protection: Maie it please you to sha∣dowe them from contempt, since they are not alto∣gether vnnecessary, for in this cause (with Mar∣cus Cato) I would not sticke to stand to the iudge∣ment of my most deprauer Titus Gracchius. J
haue auoyded lasciuiousnesse, yet enterlaced plea∣sure, discoursed of serious matters not pretermit∣tyng measurable mirth, and like a cunnyng Pain∣ter, affordyng euery shape his shadowe, I haue fi∣nished this counterfeite of a Louer, in all propor∣tions, of a Trauailer and his successe: wishing eue∣ry dramme of pleasure an vnce, and euery light motion that fitteth your honourable fantasie, a continued dilatation of rethoricall eloquence. Thus leauing my self and that J present to your honours censure, J rest. Your Honours seruaunt and Sol∣diour alwaies at commaund, Barnabe Riche.
To the Gentlemen Readers, Barnabie Riche Soldi∣our sendeth greeting. GEntlemen, vnder rhese Cloudes of fained Histories (if it please you to prie with aduised insight) you maie find the Anotomy of wantō youth, seasoned with ouer late repētance: And amongst you that bee staied, good lessons to confirme your ex∣perience. For other that are now en∣tering the world, maie finde whole∣some counsaile to preuent inconuenience. Simonides hath now imitated Sophocles the Tragedian, who accused before the Magistrates of dotage, repeated before thē his Tragedie of Oedipus Coloneus (whiche at that instaunt he had made) so that his accusers confounded in their owne o∣uerweanyng, departed with a shamefull repulse: So our Spanyard amōgst our curious Precizians condemned of lasci∣uiousnesse, now concludeth their opinions to bee corrupt, whiche accuse hym by onely reportyng this his true intent, whiche vrged hym to publishe his owne follies. It was first his will to warne the vnstaied by his fall, and to instruct the inconstaunt, to gather vp the fruites of experience, so as the after repentaunce might not make them loathsome. He was counsailed by the aduise of aged Aristo, yet refused it. He was admonished by the fall of Porcia, yet he continued vnconstaunt. What women were, Lamia taught hym. What Loue was, Titerus made triall: and neither the perswasion of a gallant Soldiour, nor the aduise of an auncient Father, neither
yet the sharpe inuectiues of his trauailyng companion An∣thonio, were euer able to withhold hym, but he would needes prosecute his follie to the ende. These medicines opertunitie offered hym in his first tra∣uaile, now what succeedeth in this volume, let the aduised Reader be Iudge. The ende is Simonides found women incon∣staunt, the worlde vnstable, pleasure still vadyng, hope vncer∣taine, expence remedilesse, lost tyme vnrecouerable, and with a teare concluded thus. Good Gentlemen, let my Cantharus layd in Balme, that is, my youthly follies seasoned with repen∣taunce call you home. And since at Ciuill Ladies haue beene stained, I beseeche you remember this, that as the Climate can not alter the effect, so this mischeef maie as well raigne in En∣gland as in Spayne, and therefore my counsaile is, that you ra∣ther content your selues with Clarindas first repulse, then in the end to become partaker of Simonides too late repentance. But now Gentlemen, for that I knowe very well, that my li∣nes shall assone finde a Scipio Nascica to reprehende, as a Ʋi∣tellius to commende, a disdainefull iudgement to mislike, as a fauourable opinion to alowe, I haue concluded with my self to laugh at Naeuius when he findes fault, and to iest at Boldu∣nus when he cauelleth: so turnyng the furie of their reportes on my person, I doubt not but to finde shoulders to beare the burthen of reproof. For you curteous Gentlemen, I doubt not but you will wincke at that you would not see, and laugh at that you best alowe of. And thus leauyng my Booke vnder the benefite of some blessed asspect, and to the cen∣sure of your friendly reportes I take my leaue. Barnabe Riche.
The second part of the Aduentures of Simonides, and first of his beyng at Rome. SIMONIDES (our amorous Pilgrim) accordyng to his purpo∣sed trauell hauing attained Rome, the onely noted place of renowne (once for exceedyng vertue, now for habundaunt vice) betooke him self to consider the situation of the place, and the dispositiō of the peo∣ple: to note the zeale of the religi∣ous, and the forwardnesse of the Citizens, in whose progeni∣turs, not onely the mirrour of Militarie profession, but also the image of true nobilite was resident. And according to the sub∣iect that serued his contemplation, he began with him self to compare Rome that is, to that whiche was: those Monuments that are, to those whiche were: those men that be, with their progeniturs which haue bin, to the end he might gather a con∣clusion of the worlde, by the comparison of bothe ages: whiche obseruation assuredly (in the iudgement of the wisest) is the most confirmer of a confused opinion, not yet perswaded with probable authoritie: And to the better accomplishyng of his purpose, he conuaied him self to his lodgyng, wherevnto accu∣stomarily, many and sundrie Gentlemen did resorte: partly to take their repast, partly to meete good companie, whiche ma∣keth the Bankett more accompted of, although the Caates be not so costly: And finding it Noone tide, and the company redy to sit doune to their dinners, he incited by hunger (which is the companion of Trauailers) and desire of satisfaction of that he mused vpon, sat doune by good fortune in the company of a re∣ligious
Father, a learned Lawyer, and a industrious Soldi∣our: our Votiue called Frier Sebastian, our Ciuilian Segnior Sandalio, and our Martialist Don Pirro de feragosa: at first sit∣tyng thei serued their appetites, afterwardes betakyng them selues to table talke, and espiyng out our religious trauailer Simonides by good fortune, yet most conuenient seruing to the gaine of our Pilgrim, thei fell into discourse of the excellencie of their professions, and for that thei would more honour our passionat straunger, thei concluded that he should be the iudge and decider of their controuercie, vpon whiche conclusion, Fa∣ther Sebastian hauing taken counsaill of his cup, and leanyng on his elbowe extendyng out his two fingers oritoriously dis∣coursed thus. The Obiection of Frier Sebastian against the Lawyer and Soldiour. WE haue vndertakē at this present so great a taske (Honourable straunger and reli∣gious Pilgrim) yea wee haue attempted suche a controuersie, as neither memorie can furnishe vs with sufficient discourse, nor our methode any waies be aunswera∣ble to the dignitie of the subiect: Suū cui∣que pulchrum, yet neither this nor that nor a thirde opinion can conclude a certaintie: for what so euer is certaine in it self nee∣deth no demonstration: For my profession, I can alledge no more sufficient commendations as touchyng the dignitie then this, that it hath relation to a high contemplation, that it per∣fecteth the soule, subdueth the earthly parte, yea, and extremi∣nateth al worldly pleasure out of memorie: our obiect is God, whom while wee consider of, our soule is as it were reared vp and in suche diuine contemplation are wee at that instant resi∣dent, as we doe but labour with Paule to be dissolued and to be with Christ. These considered, what maie the Ciuilian admitt of hymself or discourse of in his Science: if he reason of com∣parisons,
he can not continue: if of the efect, what worketh he but a transitorie peace, where Deuinitie maketh bothe peace with God and man. Naie, the greatest dignitie that maie be gathered by Deui∣nitie is this, that the ground worke is infallible, still perma∣nent and irreuocable: where amongst our Lawyers, this Can∣non may be anichilated by this learned Doctor, this distinction frustrated by that Expositer, yea, and what not turned topsie turuie to serue the season for the Ciuilians commoditie. The first disposer of Ciuill policie was your Iustinian, the first informer of hym was God, he concluded equum & bonum, the highest taught hym equum & bonum: Numa Pompilius & man not priuie to the true knowledge of God, yet cheefest of all, referred his endeuours to the seruice of the Gods, acomp∣ting that state vnhappy, where the Gods haue not receiued due reuerence: all States haue reuerenced the profession I am of, eche one hath honoured the dignitie I am called vnto, yea euen amongst the enemies of Christ, the power of the highest hath broken out by the mouth of the Christian: whereas law is but leueled by derection, administred by appointment, yea, and re∣ferred all to reformation, the confirmation whereof, neede to be sought for in no other place, then in your owne Cannons and Decreetalles, in which you should finde suche corrections, such frustrations, suche anticipations and cautelles, as the studient had euery daie neede of a new memorie, to consider of his new coated clause. If wee reason of antiquitie, and meane thereby to make a superioritie, no soner was the worlde made but De∣uinitie was knowne, yea, the worde was before worlde: for it was God, and where Religion was most honoured, there was peace most plentifull. Then Justinians radices were not knowne, but the lawe of the Tables were taught, then the lawe was not in the Ciuill Magistrate to dispose, but the Priest had it to propounde, that lawe was deliuered by succession, and confirmed by the pre∣sence of the Lawgiuer, and while that lawe was continued, Is∣raell was partaker of the promise, and benefited by the plentie, the Heathen fell before them, for the Lorde of hostes was a∣mongst
them. In fallyng from the lawe, thei were deliuered into the handes of their enemies, where in continuyng in the lawe, thei were the Lordes of all Nations: so that wee ought to note this, Deuinitie is a heauenly lawe, confirmed by anti∣quitie, sealed by God the Lawgiuer, Cleargie men sanctified and appointed, who not onely instruct our Ciuilians touching their soules, but also how to dispose their Ciuill conclusions. Our habit is aunswerable to our profession, our life correspon∣dent to them bothe: where Lawyers are sumpteous in appa∣rell, though his profession is vertuous, and concluded in Me∣diocritie: yet his life so farre from his learnyng, that they bee pugnantia inter se, thei condemne Couetousnesse, yet themsel∣ues are neuer satisfied: Thei excomunicat the Incestious, yet who more dissolute then they: They make their Plea accor∣dyng to the peney, and not to the truthe: They coyne delaies for priuate aduauntage: they make straight crooked, and croo∣ked straight: Men thei are fed with vainglorie, led by fond opi∣nion, counsailed by vncertaine Cannons, reuerenced rather for their authoritie then vertue: yea, Roome were happie if either thei were not or were better, by the one she should be rid of con∣tention, by the other benefited in their amendmēt. Good Lord, how many Athenian Oratours haue wee that counterfaite Squinancy for a little coyne, yet are to open mouthed against the poore mans Processe, suche delaies from Court to Court, suche dilatorie Pleas, suche Iudgement with Prouiso, that the poore suiter findes his purse soner emptied, then his cause en∣ded, thei affectat eloquence to maintaine bad causes, thei are studiously affable to procure new Clientes, thei are deuillishly subtill to cloke inconueniences, so that though the preceptes thei studie be neuer so perfect, yet the professors are still so vn∣towarde, that seemyng to be the ministers of light, they hunt after continuall darknesse, concluding the truthe within a gol∣den Cloude, makyng blacke white, and white blacke, darke∣nyng al thinges with their distinctions that should giue light: so that though in all thynges thei seeme ciuill, yet in all thyn∣ges thei are most inciuill. But it maie bee (Signior Sandalio) you imagine these wor∣des
to bee spoken of spite, and that they are concluded by no proofe: certainely if you doe so you are deceiued, for what soe∣uer is here spoken by me, I will not onely confirme it by writ∣ten authoritie, but also conclude it by your owne profession: naie, I will finde out that your expositers of Lawe wrote ma∣ny thynges pugnantia inter se, and agreeyng no waies: one thyng confirmed this daie, and frustrated the next daie, yea, if I should gather vp all inconueniences in heape, I should not be satisfied with a sedull, but write a whole volume: whiche if no otherwise, yet euen by Protulus the sonne of Nerua, maie bee confirmed, who by his iniurious cauilations, was the de∣stroyer of Othos cause, a man singulerly familier with hym, and whom by his owne profession to Vitellius he wickedly be∣trayed: For contrarieties, who doeth not accuse Baldus Pe∣rusinus, who although for his exceedyng learnyng he was ho∣noured amongst the famous Writers of our time, yet amongst the learnedest is accused for inconstancie in his writyng and contrarious opinions, in that wherein he should haue bin most firme. Christopher of Castile, he to shew the varietie of his wit did innouate: so that to conclude, the most parte of you bind your selues prentese to varyetie, not bent to any stabilitie, but accor∣dyng to the vanitie of the tyme, doe you fasten all your conclu∣sion. Some of you will seeme to be: yet are not, as Eneius Po∣pilius, who beyng cited as witnesse in a cause, blockishly made aunswere, that he knew nothyng. Saturius, an other of your secte, hath this praise waityng of him, that he was neuer the reporter or admitter of any profita∣ble sentence in law. For couetousnesse, who more commonly noted thē Demosti∣nes amongst the Athenians? or Hortensius amongst the Romai∣nes? whom Tullie verie pretilie nippeth of his nerenesse, by o∣penyng in couert how he had receiued a siluer Spinx of Ʋerris for pleadyng his cause: so Angelius Rais among the Neopoli∣tans, who for that his Client denied him chaunge of a peece of base monie, concluded with his Aduersarie, non suted the cause neither afterward supplied the place of an aduocate.
Now Signior Sandalio, you may sée that I am led by exam∣ple, not fed by opinion, I take not hold fast of any report: but am confirmed by myne owne knowledge, for resortyng to our common place of Iustice, I heare many execrations powred out: some openly exclaime against iniurious delaies, fewe or none liue by gettyng, al spend, so that Lawyers are only made riche, the poore Client miserablie poore. But you maie well saie that this toucheth nothyng the pro∣fession it self, and admit I thinke so, notwithstandyng this I muste and maie conclude touching the controuersie that wee haue now in hand, that where as the ground works of law, are at the disposition and inuention of man, thei are by farre oddes more base then our preceptes which are written and set downe with the finger of God, deliuered by those that were enspired by God, yea, and so thei take efecte, as not onely thei are the ground worke of all other professions, but also the mainteiners of all both Deuine and Ciuill policies. But you may (perhappes) thinke to touche me nere, admit∣tyng what I speake of Deuinitie it self, but reprehendyng the professors of the same, yet herein if you bethinke your selfe, of the surest holdfast, you shall bee the farthest of from your pur∣pose. Then the religious who more deuoute? as Apolonius the Abbot, who an hundred tymes daie and night with great con∣trition and compunction of spirite called vpon the highest, in his often prayer who wondreth not at his diligence, in his ben∣dyng of his knees, who praiseth not his humilitie. Pastuuius an other of our profession, was so intentiuely bent to prayer (as Sabellicus reporteth) that in health he was neuer found vn∣occupied, in sicknesse when weakenesse constrained hym to keepe his bed sat still deuoute, hauyng the vse of his tongue taken from hym, yet continued religious, yea, no soner ceased he meditation then his soule was separated from his bodie. Isace Sirus in the Citie of Spoletum, praied continually three daies and three nightes vpō his knees without ceasyng, which some of the Citie admittyng for an hypocriticall attempt stroke hym, reuilyng him with vngracious and bad language: whiche notwithstandyng, suche was the zeale that accompa∣nied
him, and the Iudgement of God that awaited on the wic∣ked, that the vnhappie mocker and striker of this holy man, was possessed with a Deuill, wherein this vertuous Votiue not respectyng the iniurie offered, but the zeale of a true Chri∣stian, by prayer succoured and restored for an iniurious wrong a gracious benefite. Many other could I repeate vnto you: who not onely for their assidious prayer, but also for their integritie of life, the worlde hath had and doeth holde, in wonderfull admiration. But Signior Pierro de feragosa, thinke you in these actions to scape scotfree, assuredly sir that maie not bee, for well I wote you are as studiously bent to take holde of the poore Deuine, as any, yea, and as erreligious as the best: for your profession the more I looke into it, the more I looth it, preferryng with Tully the iniustist Peace before the iustist Warre: accompting Soldiours the most vnnecessarie members that maie bee in a State: For that by experience, their practise, their honour, nay all actions whatsoeuer thei attempt, are begun, continued, and ended in bloud. These Soldiours the best sorte of them, what be thei, per∣happes noble in birthe, yet lasciuious in behauiour, constaunt in nothyng but in crueltie, wise in fewe thynges but in Stra∣tagemes, in reuengyng to cruell, in vnchast loue to dissolute, the Captaine in feare of the Soldiour, the Soldiour cozoned by the Captaine, and bothe of them commonly the consumers of the Citizens. Let Warre once take holde of a plentious lande, the Citizen is made subiect in his owne house, his wife deflowred, his daughters defamed, his riches not his owne, yet all this while the Soldiour will bee coumpted commodious: And were thei to bee admitted in a State, the Countrey Hus∣bandman is forced by feare to forsake his labour, and what he trauaileth for in sorowe, the Soldiour consumeth in riot. But neither the beginning of Warre, neither the effect, neither the action, nor the agent are vertuous, and therefore not commen∣dable. The beginnyng of Dissention was desire and coue∣tousnesse of others Possessions. The effect of Warre, is the destruction of Countries, the desolation of noble Houses, and
the sackyng of opulent Cities: the action dependeth vpon for∣tune or misfortune: vppon oportunities, delaies, forwardnesse and vntowardnesse of a number of vaine headed followers, whose behauiour and life, beeyng neuer leueled nor ordered by derection, how maie it bee thought that any of their actions should be either praise worthie or vertuous. They are the hyre∣lynges of ambicious Princes, whom though the subiect alow of for feare, yet would thei gainsaie them if thei durst. Naturally the Soldiour is borne Martialist, bloudy myn∣ded, subiect to rage and anger vpon sleight or no cause, whiche hath followyng her alwaies reuenge: Now, if the Soldiour growe into furie on so light occasion, thinke you the reuenge to be ordered by discretion. What Prince can escape the Sol∣diours furie? nay, are not thei naturally mutinous in themsel∣ues? How iniuriously left the Egiptians their Kyng Psamme∣tricus in his Warre against the Ethiopians, when as two thou∣sande of them at one instaunt reuolted to the Enemie, neither hauyng respect to the honour of their Prince, nor the sauegard of their Countrey. Nay when the Romaine Horsemen were sent out to incoūter the power of their enemies, when at pleasure thei might haue destroyed them, yet remembryng the delaie, their consull Fa∣bius made in passing the law Agraria, thei pretermited to their great shame, the offered opertunitie. The like mischeefes by their meanes fell on Apius Clau∣dias, who for that thei would dispossesse him of his Triumph, they admitted rather of a dishonourable flight. I would note also the defect of the Frenchmen, vnder the gouernment of Quintilius Varus, the horrible murther com∣mitted on Anthony Bassianus Carracalla Emproure by his sworne Soldiour Martialis, and the destruction of Adoaldus Kyng of Gothes, by one of his owne retinew called Zilla Ge∣pida. Truly truly, the memorie of the notable disasters, vngra∣cious and bloudie Murthers, Incestious and vngodly Rapes committed by the Soldiours, inforceth me almost into a hor∣rour to call them to remembraunce. But let vs but haue an eye towardes themselues, & beholde
how beastly thei bee, the bruite beast by naturall instinct doe daily eschewe the inconuenience that folowe them: and haue an eye to that whiche may profite them. Contrariewise, these Souldiers like to Hircan Tigers, reuenge them selues on their owne bowelles, some Parricides, some Fratricides, all Homicedes. Alexander the great the onely noted man for a Souldier, how iniuriously & cruelly vsed he Calistines ye Philosopher, who for that accordyng to the preceptes of Philosophie, he refused the Diefieng of a mortall Prince, whervppon (as a traiterous and rebellious subiecte) he caused him to be dismembred and torne in peeces, his eares cutte from his heade, his lippes and nose deformed, and by these vnacostomed and most horrible tor∣mentes miserably to make end of his life. It erketh me to remember the horible and murtherous mis∣cheefes that befortuned vnhappie Roome in the tyme of the sedicious Warriour Caius Marius, how many notable Citi∣zens, renowned Orators, aged Fathers, suckyng Children, and sorrowfull Mothers were deuoured by this Monster, who was not onely satisfied to martire them by his Tormentors, but also endeuoured to be an actor in ministryng the torment, wher neither eloquence, neither desert towardes the common weale, neither the teares of the Romaine Matrons, nor the sub∣mission of the Cities in league could staie the furie of so greate a bloudsucker, but that Marcus Anthoni that sweete tongued Orrator (who in tyme by his eloquent perswasion asswaged the furie of the Soldiour, and kept his sworde in sheath) must sacrifice with his bloude to the vniust fury of Marius: the father and the sonne both Crassi, in eche others sight were cru∣elly murthered. Yea, alas what will not be attempted if the Soldiour once breake out into furie. Pontanus maketh report of a most execrable and cursed murther, as me thinketh (Signi∣or Pierro) no time may wine out ye staine from your profession, certaine quarrelsome Soldiours hauing falne out amongst them selues, and often tymes skirmished togethers, be fortu∣ned at an infortunate méetyng to kill one of the contrarie facti∣on, whose dead bodie when thei had gotten into their handes
(truly I am abashed to speake of it) with bloudie handes thei cut in small peeces, afterward taking out his liuer and harte, thei broyled it on the coales, distributed it in small gobbettes to euerie one a little amongst the copsemates at a Breakefast, afterward with great ioye and gladnesse thei satisfied their in∣saciate thirst of reuenge, with the verie taste of the murthered wretches bloud, not leauyng to drinke to the Goodes themsel∣ues, the verie reuengers of so detestable iniuries. I maie therefore religious Gentleman, leaue all now to your consi∣deration, who haue heard the dignitie of my callyng, with the great innornitie of the profession of these two Gentlemen, that is to say, the couetousnesse of the Lawyer with the crueltie of the Soldiour, and will conclude with the humilitie of the De∣uine, and accordyng to veretie, reporte your iudgement: for I now leaue farther to discourse, and doubt not but Signior San∣dalio will supplie the place. The Lawyer and Soldiour both touched withe the harde obiection of this Oratorious Deuine, after thei had a while gnawne on the bitte, and disgested their choler, Sandalio, as his place serued him began his replie in this sort. The replie of Sanda∣lio the Lawyer. AMidst the desert of Scithia, a renouned Ab∣bot called Moyses was resident, who being desired to giue his censure vppon a Frier of the brotherhood that had offended, he came in presence with a great sack of sand at his backe, and beyng demanded what he brought with him, he made aunswer thei were his sinnes, whche scarcely he was able to beare thei were so burdensome, muche lesse to correcte an others. Saincte Fraunces trauilyng in companie with one of his fraternitie, and thei meetyng with a poore man, the Frier his companion saied vnto him: Father, although this man be poore touchyng the riches of the worlde, it maie be yet, in desire to enioy much,
he is riche: which speeches beyng well waied of this Godly fa∣ther, he forced this coniecturyng Deuine to disrobe him self and to couer the poore man, thinkyng hym worthie to make recompence by a benefite, who with leude language had iniu∣riouslie slaundered the poore man. The actions of these holy men wel considered, be sufficient to condemne your presumtion Father Sebastian, I feare me you haue more cause to cary the sacke then had Moyses, and to be disrobed then the other Frier, who not onely haue taken vpon you to slaunder others but also to dyfie your self, feedyng your owne fancie with the copiousnesse of your sweete set wor∣des, and imagine that your colours bee of continuance e∣nough to shadow your iniurous counterfaite, but by that time you haue heard but a little what you haue mistaken, and con∣sider of that I can reporte, you shal find how greatly your own self haue neede of reformatiō, and how vainly you vaunt before the victorie. Your strst argumentes you brought touchyng the dignitie of your profession, as I remember was this, that it was Deuine, inscrutable, still parmenent, prescribed by God, immitated by you of the Clergie, opened to vs of the Laietie, and all this I admit, nay I honour, I acknowledge what so is religious is Honourable, and if better title might bee I would minister it. Yet thus farre (maister Docter) I must wade, that our Lawes although thei were the dispositions of mortall mē, yet are thei the inspiration of the highest, and what so is sette doune by the finger of God for offensiue and not to be folowed, is neither admitted of the Lawyer, nor let slip without correc∣tion. Where the Lorde was not knowne, lawe ministred equite, and where God is knowne, the contēpt of some is such, that if no corporall punishment did terrifie, the bare commaun∣dement of the lawe ministred by the hande of Moyses, would little or nothyng preuaile: And truely touchyng lawe in it self I find thus much, that hauyng past through so many inter∣pretours handlyng, it can not be but the method should be ex∣quisit, and lookt into by so many Religions, it can not be dis∣ordered: And certainly beyng (as it were) leueled and propor∣tioned according to the true meaning of the Scriptures it can
not farre miscarie. The end whereto Law hath relation is to profite the good, perfecte the common weale, releaue the oppressed, and mini∣ster Iustice according to the equitie of the cause, not the digni∣tie of the person. There is no vice but Lawe bridleth it, yea, whatsoeuer past from the verie Ethnycke, did alwaies abate the power of excesse. Dionisious of Siracusa, though otherwise a Tirant, yet in this made a wise Lawe, that those whiche ex∣cessiuely gaue them selues to banquetyng should be punished very asperly. Licurgus, made Lawes against Dronkennesse, the Romaines against wicked and vngodly Whorehunting, the Grecians, against incest, the Lacedemonians against excesse in apparell. Augustus Ceaser, against pompious buildynges, the Lucans, against prodigalitie, ye Aegiptians, against Vsurie, the Thebans, against iniurious Parentes, the Romaines, against cruell and hard harted Maisters. In my readyng this finde I Sir Sebastian, yea, and further more dare assure you, that what so you cry out on in the Pul∣pit, we condemne in place of Iustice, and what so you finde neglected in religion, we correcte with greate seuerenesse. I see not moreouer how you are to touch the person of the Lawyer, more then your self, either with contrarious opini∣ons, or vnnecessarie positions, or iniurious delaies, or auari∣cious desires. In general, the men be very studious (for the art requires no lesse) and where the mind is ocupied with wise preceptes, the actions of the life can hardly be vnconstant, if at any tyme contrarieties passe, vnlesse in a particuler mans opinion, this toucheth not the Lawe it self with any varietie, but the misdeamyng man: yea, you knowe well in arte, this matter is vndoubtedly true, yt by contraries the truth is sonest founde out, and without controuertyng (in myne opinion) the groundworkes of all artes should bee lefte but nakedly bare, but for the science in it self, it is still the same neuer alte∣ryng. What the Cannon Lawe is and of what authoritie, you can as well as I beare witnesse, whiche hath his original from the mouthe of our holy Father the Pope, and from the counsailes, from the decrees of the auncient Fathers, and po∣sitions
of learned Deuines, the whiche (I beleeue) you admit nothyng more holy, since by the Church, the disanullers of the same are excommunicated with Bell Booke and Candle. Yet for all this if it might be spoken, non idem semper est ca∣non, I must not saie contrarious, but if libertie were graunted me to touche what I knowe true, Lorde what squaryng could I finde amongst your generall Counsailes, what daliaunce with Scriptures: should I saie wrestyng of them, no, mum budget, you are of the holy house, and therefore farre be it from me to reproue you, when I like not the looke of a faggot: But this I dare saie for the Deuine, as he for the Lawyer hath al∣readie auowed, he hath as humble a Habite as the best, yet as lasciuious is he as the moste, whiche poinct although you can hardly fasten vppon the Lawyer, yet the most parte of you, can not but in your conscience confesse you culpable: yea, and Ma∣ster Deuine is couetous too, and can as well skill of a Peter peney, as the Lawyer of his Clientes fee. But it maie bee that what so is viscious in the Lawyer, shall be vertuous in the De∣uine, and so in deede you maie matche me: Yet for examples sake I will open the liues of some of our Romishe Prelattes, whom though you haue preferred worthely for their humilitie, yet some I maie touche for their approued follies: so that with you I will turne all vppon the Cleargy men, and leaue the Scripture, as it is perfect in it self, except it be peruerted by his Interpreter. Amongst you Prelattes some are Heritickes, some to much learnyng doeth make them mad: Some blinde bussardes that will not see: Some so well learned that thei list to erre. So that you shall confesse (except of purpose you will proue obsti∣nate) that more Cleargie men haue erred touchyng the inter∣pretation of Scriptures, then Ciuilians euer doated in the Cannons of the Lawe. For Couetousnesse, who laugheth not at the Bishoppe of Treuers, Ieames of Sirke Prince elector, who so importunatly begged of the Emprour, that he was forced to cast him of thus, if thou make not an ende quickly of askyng, I will quickly finde out the waie to denaie.
Antiochus the Bishoppe of Phenissa (honoured for his e∣loquence, yet disdained for his couetousnesse) at Constantino∣ple, gathered vp a great masse of money by preachyng, and yet he hymself wrote a Booke against couetous hordyng vp of ri∣ches. The like did Seuerranus Bishoppe in Siria, who by indi∣rect meanes sought to dispossesse S. Chrisostome of his Sea, yet accordyng to his deserte, he finished his purpose with vn∣happie death. For ignoraunce in the Cleargie men, wee neede not seeke out antiquities, whereas the present tyme ministreth matter e∣nough to write on. Liuynges now are solde, not giuen by deserte, corruption is the Belweather in leadyng of Beneficed men, and a man maie assone steppe vp to place of dignitie by riches, as by righ∣teousnesse. In reuenge, who more cruell then the Ecclesiasticke, he co∣uereth all thynges vnder Cloudes, yet is as highly incenced with rancour and disdaine as the best. Marcus Placentias Priest, hatyng with habominable en∣uie the Bishop Adrian, and attending long tyme at the doore of his Chamber, to execute his pretended and murtherous vil∣lanie, not able longer to suffer the delay, turned the furie of his reuenge on hymself, and dyed on his owne sworde. Sixtus Bishop of Rome, beyng enuiously accused by Ma∣rianus and Bassus two Priestes, that he had deflowred Crisogo∣mita a Virgine, hauyng acquited hymself before the generall Counsaill, excommunicated his accusers, refusing vpon their humble and penitent submission to reconcile hymself to them. How horrible was the hatred of the Bishoppe of Rome Bo∣niface the 8. whose enure extended so farre, as to open his con∣ceiued rancour, he neither regarded the place, for he was in the Churche, nor the action, for he was at Prayer, neither the day, for it was Ashwednesdaie, but onely bent to vomite out his ve∣nome, when he came to besprinckle the Bishoppes and Abbots with Ashes, he turned the dust into Porcetus Spinalas eyes, sai∣yng: Remember thou, thou art of the faction of the Gebelins, and yt thou shalt turne to dust (threatnyng him farther with the
faggot) who rather expected his Asperge. I can not well think but that these matters are odious, yea, and so notably to be de∣tested, as no religious eare maie well brooke them. Further∣more, I can not but wonder at the hypocrisie of some of you of the Cleargie, who committyng all these errours in open sight of the worlde, yet blinde all mens eyes with power, that they maie not see: compell those by threates whom vaine perswa∣sions can not allure: intice some with giftes whiche otherwise would mislike your faction: and excommunicate those with curses, whiche will not dissemble your iniurious follies. Tot∣quotes, Pluralities, they are but common Fees from the whole Fleece: the richest of you bee non residentes, and if a man had your finger in a hole to make you sing your Cofiteor, I feare me (Sir Sebastian) we should haue you confesse that your holiest Sainctes haue some what loued lasciuiousnesse, and some reli∣gious feminine Votaries, to carie some impression of a Frier on their bellie, though the Picture of our Ladie be the Sainct thei sue to. And whereas you obiect how iniuriously the Lawyer dea∣leth in delaying the Processes of poore men, in eatyng them out of their owne, I feare me the Pardoner is as nere a sickpe∣ney of the poore mans good as the Lawyer, and where we one∣ly feede them with delay for a tyme, you perswade them to that whiche is to be doubted of, if it will euer fall out at all. Not o∣therwise then accordyng to the liberalitie of the giuer, you be∣stowe your praiers, as for the oppressed (I beleue) you approue the Prouerbe, no peney, no Pater noster: So that I must ne∣cessarily conclude this, that since you be men more swallowed vp in sinne then the Lawyer, you are more vnworthie, and for that your talent is the greater, you are to aunswere the more: You plaie bo péepe with vs of the Laytie, reprouing vs for that whiche your selues daylie commit, and will be still correctyng our misdeedes, yet confirme vs in errour by your misdemea∣nours. We if we peruert any mās cause, hinder but his world∣ly honour: You in inuertyng any thyng in your profession, are the destroyers of the soule. We if we vse contrarieties, may be ordered by the Iudge: You though neuer so vniust in your po∣sitions,
will yet be Iudges on your owne causes: Our humili∣tie whatsoeuer, with you is hypocrisie: You though the prou∣dest Prelattes of the worlde for one knee bendyng, will bee coumpted humble. If you will be more worthie, then in offen∣dyng, you are the more to be misliked of. If you wil be heades, why gouerne you not discreetly. If you will haue superioritie, why are you so negligent: Humilitie despiseth honour, yet you hunt after them: Those that sauer of the worlde are not of God, yet are you worldly: The high mynded often erre, yet can not the Cleargie man varie: for what so is perpetrated or attemp∣ted by any of you, though it passe the limites of vertue, it can not be but vice: though it be irreligious, it can not be without religion: though it bee blacke it must bee white, and why, you that make all colours, will dispose of them as you list. Your e∣yes bee penetrated to looke on all men, yet all men must bee blinde least thei looke into you: so that I must euen conclude of you thus, you are of that making, that onely you are exemp∣ted from the Iudgement of the worlde by your owne power, and the world must of force alowe of you for Correctors, where as in sooth your selues are most worthie to bee corrected. Yet in truthe (Sir Sebastian) I misdeeme not of your opinion in the Soldiour: for in that I doe agree so well with you, as I vtterly forbid hym a place in a well gouerned State: and here∣in I alowe your learned positions, examples and conclusions. For what is there to be allowed of in Warlike bloudsuckers: not their pollicie, for that it hath relation to an ill end: not their dilligence, for that it respecteth nought but murther: not their obedience, for that it is for feare: not their Iudgementes, for that thei are seuere: not their orders, because thei are vncer∣taine to commaunde: not their life, because it is leude. Their imagination is reuenge, their mindes bloudie, their dispositions wrathfull, their attempt vnconstaunt: yea, and suche thei be as will sell God for golde, and their Countrie for commoditie. But because Father Sebastian hath touched this clause nere enough, I will be the breefer onely addyng this anticipa∣tion to Don Pierros apologie, that the Soldiour is not so no∣bly
acounted of amōgst Princes as the Lawyer, for that which in our memorie a most renounced Emperour Sigismunde, of ex∣quisite valewe, yea, and a braue Soldiour confirmed it to one George Ficellas a learned Lawyer, on whom he not onely be∣stowed the order of Knyghthoode, but in all causes he also pre∣ferred him as a Counsailer, whiche beyng obicted against him by some of his noble Soldiours, he made answere, that it was easie for him to make an hundred Soldiours in one daie, but to make a Doctor, required a thousand yeres. Herein maie our Soldiour perceiue (if he please) how light their profession is when it is learned in a daie, and how farre to be vnworthie in respect of the Lawyer, when a Prince of such memorie concluded of it so slenderly. I could report vnto you father, the estimation that Alexan∣der had of the Ciuilian Vlpianus, whom in all his secrete at∣temptes and serious businesses, he tooke counsaile of him, and would admit nothing to passe, whiche were not confirmed by him. Yea, the Princes of our tyme haue so honoured Lawyers, as that thei by speciall authoritie inioyned them, that if ought did passe their handes (yea, though vnder priuie signet) thei should not alowe, were it repugnant or contrarie to Law. My conclusion is therfore noble Iudge, that since the Law∣yer is lesse vicious then the Deuine, and of greater dignitie then is the Soldiour, he should haue place aboue them bothe, whereas the one is excessiuely sinfull, the other excedingly per∣uerse and cruell. The determination whereof I leaue to your correction, and now yeeld successiuely the roome to Don Piero de Feragosa to speake for him self. Our Soldiour hauyng attentiuely bent his eare to either of the inuectiues, and cōcluded with him self how to aunswer, began to discourse thus. The Apologie of the Sol∣diour in his owne defence
ALthough I haue no Schoole Rethoricke (Gentlemen) or fine phrases to make my cause more commendable, yet as the naked truth leadeth me, & myne owne experience hath taught me, I will make you priuie to my little skill. In my youth when I was bookishe, I remember I red a Pretie Storie of Sainct Barnade, who if by chaunce he fortuned to spy out a poore man meanly appareled, he would alwaies saie to hym self thus: truely Barnade this man with more pacience beareth his crosse then thou. If one richly apparelled, it maie be that this man vnder his delycate clothing, hath a better soule then thou hast (Barnnde) vnder thy religious habit. In whiche action of his this I bluntly i∣magine of (maister Deuine) that the Godly Father had his eye neuer parciall, but alwaies condemnyng him self, and not reprouing others. This lesson if you and the Lawyer had learned, and you e∣specially sir Sebastian had followed, you would not haue bin so busie in bewraiyng other mens errours, but indeuoured to be industrious, in amendyng your owne imperfections. Aesopes Crowe and our Cleargie men are now adaies of one condition, ye bird cared not how many fethers she borowed to make her self braue, nor thei how many vices thei correct, so thei cloake their owne, the birde in aspiryng to be Kyng had a reprochfull fall, and disrobed of her plumes proued but a blacke Crowe, the Cleargie men, in endeuoryng to seeme ho∣ly proue vicious, and but seuered from the dignitie of their profession, are in the ende as blacke in vices as the birde in colours. Thinke you (good Sir Sebastian) that as nature hath made vs Soldiours resonable, so she hathe not alowed vs the fruites of reason, both to looke into other mens actions and to order our owne, yes sir yes, though the clarke be neuer so subtil the Soldiour can compasse him, and the Lawyer neuer so craftie simplicitie may discouer him: and in that you make Soldiours altogither vicious, it must nedes fall out that some of your sin∣nes
& theirs are of acquaintaūce, or els yours are so proud that thei disdaine ours. But because you must not erre, you are with out sinne, yet notwithstandyng, giue me leaue to saie some∣what in mine owne cause. The Soldiour saie (Maister De∣uine) is an vnnecessarie member, the onely maintainer of the aspiryng Princes pleasure, the foe of Citezens, the distroier of countrie men, the sacker of Cities, the deflourer of Maidens, a light headed reuenger, a harebrained attēpter, a bloudie per∣former, constant in nothing but in crueltie, yea, to conclude worthie of nothyng but not to bee. Now I by my experience can shew, and by your profession will perswade either of you, that a Soldiour in liuing is more continent then you both, and for a Commonwealth as profita∣ble as the best. Warre is a minister of Gods Iustice, for either contempt of Religion, or wicked life in ciuill Magestrates, so that it is your sinnes that drawethe the Soldiours sworde: whiche if you liued well should be sheathed perpetually. God is not the author of ill, but the chafticer of abuse, he ordereth the will of Princes to reuenge, and we as obedient subiectes, are the ministers to performe. If power were not to maintaine Princes Proceedinges, the Prince should be dispossest of his state, cruell handes would be laide on the Ministrie, yea, the Lawyer pulde from place of Iustice: so that in peace, the name of a Soldiour restraineth the rebillious, in warre makes sub∣iect the proudest resister. Wee referre our actions to the Princes will, the Prince by the direction of God, who since he is the gouernour of bothe actions, I dare auowe thei are not vicious. But you maie obiect that in proude attemptes of Princes, the Soldiour is still present, not respctyng the cause, but his owne profite. Truely in iniurious causes I knowe that for certaine, the Soldiour is as contrary to the Warre as the best, who by proofe (and not by gesse) conclude of the euente of the battaile, when the cause proceedeth of a wrongfull grounde, not like the eDuine who will continue his errours without controlement, nor like the Lawyer, who of purpose will take a wrongfull cause, to cozin his Client of his coyne.
If then warres be lawfull, warriours are not illegitimate: if in generall, the profession is to be liked of, then can you but finde fault with perticuler men, and if so you minde to nippe me, neither Maister Deuine shall scape scotfree with his smooth lookes, nor Maister Lawyer with his glozes: for this I dare auowe, that if eche of our liues be lookt into, the Sol∣diour is as surely tied to all vertuous actions as any one pro∣fession what so euer. In the choyce of a Soldiour, we doe not onely regarde the abilitie of his bodie, but the qualitie of the mynd, for if Religion, circumspection, preuention, counsaill, experience by longe practise, zeale, faithfull performaunce of promise, resolutnesse in attemptes, continencie in life, care∣fulnesse to satisfie be not in him that would enter the professi∣on, truely the charge will be ill lookte into, neither is suche a one to be admitted in choyce, then if a Soldiour of iudgement be had, when he is imployde, howe liues he in the feelde, in the feare of God, not assured of his life from one hower to an o∣ther, abstinent in diet, hard lodgyng, diligent to please, care∣full to correct, both handes, thoughtes, and all are occupied: so that neither leisure serues him to be idely occupied, nor the seueritie of the Captaine admits him to runne astraie. Well then, since it so fallethe out that such thei should bee, and thus thei are imployed, you must confesse that some there are or els the name and title should bee hardly bestead: For the bad, it maie be thei borrow some of their errours from you, you are so priuie to their escapes. But me thinkes your iudgement in disposition of Nature, whereas you make the whole sorte of Soldiours rashe, rebel∣lious, bloudie mynded, and murtherous is but very bad: truely if thei should bee rashe, it is nothyng but in venturyng their li∣ues for you that hate them: for if thei were not gouerned, their successe should bee more infortunate then it is. If rebellious, truely Alexander the great had not conquered so many Coun∣treis, subdued so many Kyngdomes, and ouercome so many Nations, and as it were but with a handfull of his Macedo∣nians and Gretians. If bloudy mynded, why then spared Ceasar those Senators and Citizens of Rome, whom bothe by their
owne hand writynges and often attemptes, he well knewe to be the followers of Pompei and his capitall enemies. If mur∣therous, how often might the Venetian Armies haue worthely spoyled the whole Ilande of Creat, whiche not onely had mur∣thered many of their Families with the sworde, but also rebel∣led against them more then fiue tymes. If Incontinent, what caused Scipio to redeliuer that noble yong Virgine, who for her passyng beautie and greate admiration of person, was presen∣ted vnto him as a rare gift, Scipio hymself amazed at the sight, would yet deliuer her to Luceius, to whom she was espoused, and gaue hym also for a Dowrie the golde that her Parentes had brought to redeeme her. If couetous, how fell it out that after L. Mummius had taken Corinthe, and adorned all Italy with the riches of that Spoyle, keepyng so little to his owne vse, that the Senate was faine for very neede, to giue Dowrie to his Daughter of the common Treasure. There is no rea∣son that either you can obiect against vs of your owne know∣ledge, or alledge by your readyng, but I haue salued it vp, ei∣ther by reasonable demonstration, or sufficient instaunce. And to speake my conscience, I know not the best of you, if Warre should waite on you, that would not crouche to haue a Soldi∣ours countenaunce, and bende if he beckoned. But why is he not liked of with the Religious, because he can not finde in his harte to colour an errour: and wherefore is he discommodious to the Lawyer, for that he abridgeth hym of conuenient tyme, to practise his corruption. Thus the poore Soldiour standeth in harde tearmes you maie see (Religious Gentleman) when he shall bee backbited of those, who moste leudly gouerne them selues: and bee condemned by suche as haue greatest neede of amendment. But what is he (I praie you) that is spoyled by the Soldi∣our but the Enemie: whom if he should suffer to prosper in his wealth, the continuaunce of trouble would decaie our owne state, and we might suffer others to be riche to make our selues poore, ministryng our enemies fewell, to set our selues on fire, and like innocent babes, bring our Maister a rodd to beate our owne tailes.
But this let I willyngly slippe, giuyng the ignoraunt ra∣ther leaue to correct what thei knowe not, then openyng those experimentes that tyme hath driuen into me by many occasi∣ons, I might make them note that whiche if thei knewe, thei would neuer well imploye. But for that I haue learned some one poinct of Rethoricke of you both, I will now approue it if I can, openyng a little the escapes of bothe your two professi∣ons: so that in findyng many errours in you, I maie the better colour myne owne. And first for you Maister Cleargie man, thus muche must I craue, that as liberall I maie speake what I thinke, as you what you please, so doubt I not, but to proue you as erreli∣gious as the best, and the Lawyer as lawlesse as the most. In∣continencie is the badge of your profession, or els Pope Ione could not haue a yong Monk in her belly, nor so many Clear∣gie men combred with yong Maidens first children. The Libertines as you call them, the Protestantes I meane (for amongst those in my tyme I haue beene conuersaunt) al∣though thei maie perhappes in pointes of Deuinitie bee farre from you as you thinke, and though the errors wherewith you charge them be aboue my reache, yet truely as touchyng their life, I haue not founde them so leude, and yet hauyng sinned are so little corrected. Nay, this errour is not onely perpetrated by your selues, but also wincked at in others, where if a man bee neuer so ince∣stious, he maie bee assoyled for siluer, and a dubble Ducket (a∣mongst you) will release more Synnes in a moment, then the wickedest man maie commit in his whole life: so that you who should restraine, graunt libertie: and for a priuate gaine vndoe many, whiche led by fonde lustes haue small regarde of them selues. If I were as priuie to your Bookes as your selues, and could reporte vnto you the most notable misdeedes of other a∣ges, as I can make open some of our tyme, neither would you sit to heare my long discourse, nor my voyce able to serue me to finishe out my tale. But touchyng your liues this I finde, who despiseth sinne most, followeth it a little, and though in o∣pen
face of the worlde some of you can not brooke to bee ac∣compted couetous, yet if a priuate commoditie lighten in your lappes, you will be as readie to catche as the best, and with as faire speeches to flatter for commoditie as the most. You are lime fingered for Liuynges to catche them ere thei fall: yet if a Lay man bee but a little couetous, he were best to amende for feare of condemnation: Nay, not onely are you couetous but bloud suckers, not satisfied with the bloud of the father, but workyng reuenge vpon the very harmelesse infauntes his chil∣dren, as did Rogerius Ʋbaldinus, Bishoppe of Pisanum, toward Ʋgolinus, whom when with his three children he had long time kept in prison, and fed hym with hope of present libertie, if so he would make the saied Archbishoppe priuie, to certaine trea∣sure whiche he had hidden: whiche when he had confessed, and the Bishop hauyng got the money, he not onely broke his pro∣mise, but also starued hym and his three children most misera∣blie to death: whiche fact, the worlde doeth not onely wonder at, but also abhorre the wicked practises of suche villanie. Some of you are Apostates, falling from the faith, as Theo∣philus a Priest in Cilicia in my memorie, who for that he was wrongfully depriued of his Archdeaconrie, bounde hymself to the Deuill, that if he would restore him to his former dignitie, he would become his body and soule: afterward beyng againe in his present place of honour, he began vehemently to be per∣plexed in mynd, with the combraunce of his owne conscience, and with teares seekyng the fauour of the Almightie, he was mercifully saued and deliuered. These and suche like sorte of men are you, and yet men must bee tongue tied in reprouyng you, and you liberall in speakyng what you please: but as plai∣nesse is my profession, so plainely haue I opened my mynde, meanyng a little to quite the speeches of Signior Sandalio: he is a Lawyer, and I would bee lothe to dye in his debt, because myne heires might not be troubled after my decease. Of hym self I accompt thus, he may be good, but for the greatest num∣ber of his profession, thei are starke naught in that thei are co∣uetous: for if corruption were not in the lawe, his profession were not gainefull: For if so bee the lawe be certaine in it self,
why should Iudgement bee delaied: If bent to doe right, why are so many poore men wronged: If grounded on conscience, why is it parciall. But if the vse of the thyng bee onely ill im∣ployed, the faulte is in the Lawyer: Then thus it falleth out, that he who knoweth the will of his Maister and doeth it not, should be beaten with many stripes, how like you this Cannon Maister Doctor? I remember as I trauailed to Athens, and being desirous to see the Monumentes there, it was my happe by a good com∣panion of myne (that smelt somethyng out of your dealinges) to bryng me to the Aulter of Minerua, by whiche oftentymes Pleaes were maintained on bothe parties: in which place, we founde two siluer Celles, hauyng on eche of them, their seue∣rall inscriptions: on the one was written, The Pulpit of re∣proach, on the other, The Cell of Impudencie. A straunge thyng it is to see, that so many ages past since the settyng vp of these, yet the vyces are not ceased, since in all whatsoeuer you reason of, either you are reprochfull or impudent: reprochfull, in accu∣sing onely on reporte: Impudent, in maintainyng naught but hearesaies. For vs Soldiours, admit our swordes fasten on the Enemie, yet venture wee our liues for the sauegarde of our freendes: you neither haue respect of freend nor familiare, but so you maie profite your selues, you spare not to eate your Clientes out of house and home. But where as you would perswade me by the fauour that the Emprour Sigismund shewed to a Lawyer, if by that it were to bee concluded, that the Lawyer is more excellent, if fauour bee that you take holdfast on, neither you can bee admitted be∣fore a Soldiour, nor the Deuine take place before a Warri∣our: For you, one Emperour serues your turne, but looke but from the first foundation of this famous Citie, and you shall finde that the Soldiour was he that defended the State: the Soldiour was he that made Rome notable: yea, the Soldiour was onely he that had the creation of the Emperours. In the losse of a Soldiour, how mourned Iulius Ceaser, whom not on∣ly he buried with bitter teares beyng dead, but also aliue bene∣fited with great honours.
Pompei the great, built the Citie of Nicopolis, to no other end but to harbour Soldiours, yea, our most notable gouer∣nours of this Empire, accompted of a Soldiour as of his fel∣lowe in misfortunes, and in attemptes: of you, but as his flat∣terers, to confirme but what he please. Perhappes for main∣taynyng of a good Plea, the Lawyer maie get a little popu∣ler praise, but we for subduyng of an Enemie to Rome, had the benefite of a triumphe. Some of your Oratours for their presumptions haue been cut of, most of our Soldiours for their desertes, haue had their statues set vp in the marked place. When Haniball knocked at Rome gates, why preuailed you not by eloquence, why confounded you not by Religion: Alas the while, your Cake was dowe, and had not the Soldi∣our giuen the enemie the repulse, your actions had been scarce saileable. While the Soldiour gouerned, peace was as plen∣tifull as now it is: the reuenewes of Rome greater then now thei be: the excesse of Rome lesser then now thei are. In our tyme of gouernment, Rome was renowned for her Iustice and faithfull lawes: Now, when the sworde is in the hande of the Religious and ciuill Magestrate, Rome is noted for exceedyng vice. In the daies of Traiane, other Countreis sought their La∣wes from Rome: In these latter tymes Rome is accompted lawlesse of all the worlde. Now for the Cleargie man, what maie he vaunt of, when he only defendeth Religion but with his tongue, but the Sol∣diour in daunger and hazarde of his life. For the Lawyer, you can not bryng him to speake at the Barre but with a great fee, where the poore Soldiour his hyre is but eight pence for the very day seruice he looseth his life: And whether is he more worthie that if he bee imployed, it is but proulyng with his pen for priuate pence, or he that oposeth hymself with his Pike for publique profite. So that for the sake, bothe of Deuine and Lawyer, yea, for the maintenaunce of the whole State we venture our liues: and yet for all this let Peace smile on Rome a little, and Soldiours be vnnecessarie.
And seyng it now coms in question, what profession is most worthie, of sondrie men I haue heard sondrie opinions. Kyng Dridanias was wont to saie to the Cicilians, that to the sacrificyng Priestes of the Temple most honour was due. Bryas Kyng of Argiues, gaue moste honour to the Philo∣sophers that read in Schooles. Numa Pompilius amongst the Romaines, was of opinion that he was worthie of most reputa∣tion, to whom had happened the victorie of any famous Bat∣taile. But Anaxarchus the Philosopher, ordained amongst the Phinetiens, that in a Commonweale, suche should be honoured, who in the tyme of Peace entertained the State in tranquili∣tie, and in the furie of Warre, was founde a valiaunt Protec∣ter, of the limites and liberties of his Countrey. And I praie (Maister Deuine) what wantes he in worthinesse, who defen∣deth Religion with the losse of his life as the Soldiour, of him who doth but coate it doune in his quiet Studie as the Deuine. And good Maister Lawyer, whether is he most beneficiall to the Citizen, that defendeth hym in rest vpon the fronter of his enemies as the Warriour, or he that cozins hym of his coyne within the Citie walles as the Lawyer. But to conclude, bothe to the Deuine and Lawyer, this I add, that since thei bee so perfect in life and exquisite in liuyng, I would I were suche a one as they thinke themselues to bee, and not as they are. So that noble Gentleman to whom the iudgement of this controuersie belongeth, I am to referre all to your derection: assuryng you this, that although my tale bee more blunt then these Oratorious Deuines, yet it might please you to gather of my conclusions as you please, and to giue your iudgement as the equitie of the cause requireth. Simonides, hauing heard the sundrie and seuerall discources of eche of these Signiors, and perceiuing that it fell to his turne to conclude, bespake hym thus.
❧ The censure of Simonides vpon the Deuine, the Lawyer, and the Soldiour. GEntlemen, my ignoraunce in eche of your professions, my want of knowledge of the fashions of this State, the vnstable con∣tēplations which now gouerne my mynd, were reasons enough (if you knew them) to mislike of my iudgement: yet since it pleased you to picke me out as an Arbite∣rer in so ambiguous a cause, as my little skill will serue me, I will make recapitulation of your Obiections, and make you breefly priuie to my conclusion. This Religious Gentleman (in myne opinion) very elo∣quently, both by Prophane and Ecelesiasticall examples, hath maintained the dignitie of his profession, and condemned ma∣ny imperfections bothe of Soldiour and Lawyer. The learned Ciuilian hath both aunswered the Obiections were laied against hym, and inuerted them against his Aduer∣sarie, bothe of you conclude against the Soldiour, who though in bare tearmes he maintained a sufficient cause, yet certainely he hath painted out bothe the Deuines and Lawyers imper∣fections in approued colours. Generally I finde this, Coue∣tousnesse is bothe in the Cleargie man, Lawyer, and Soldi∣our: Excesse in Deuine, Lawyer, and Soldiour: yea, and affec∣tation of honour, bothe in Deuine, Lawyer, and Soldiour. I accompt the Deuine the very onely man to bee honoured if he liue well: The Lawyer to be wondred at if he iudge well: And yet the Soldiour not to be inferiour for he defendeth well. I can not tell what Soldiours bee in Rome, neither am I priuie to their abuse: but what thei are in Genoua well I wot, where as not onely excesse by a Soldiours meanes was bani∣shed, but also the whole State worthely counsailed by an ho∣norable Captaine. If therefore, I should resolue with my self, to giue iudgement on either partie, either the Deuine might correct me in displacyng hym, or the Lawyer condemne me in
preferryng the Soldiour, or the Soldiour mislike me in ad∣mitting you both. Whervpon, sith vnperfectly from my youth vp hetherto I haue alwaies iudged of colours, I would if I might so order my self now (hauyng seene somewhat) that in pleasing you all I might yet preferre the truth. Your vertues in eche profession are fewe, your vices too many, but sith your errours are more in number then your good qualities, your good is simple bad in that it conquereth not the worse. When first I attempted Iourney towardes this famous Citie of Rome, noated and renowned through all the worlde, I thought verelie that neither the Cleargie man should be con∣tencious he was so deuine, nor the Lawyer couetous he was so lookt into, nor the Soldeour dissolute, where is or should be so much discipline. But nowe when I fall in companie a∣mongst Citizens, I finde reported Rome for vertues, is now the verie Rome that is vicious, for great must the errours bee in the state, where bothe Deuine Lawyer and Soldiour are altogither dissolute. I remember in our Cronicles of Spayne, when couetous Presidentes sent from this Citie did gouerne vs, oppressyng vs with exactious, and suckyng the marrowe of our wealthe from the bodie of our Commanweale, we had alwaies redresse here: this place was the nurse of reformed iustice throughout the whole world, but sithe the members now are so farre gone from them selues, as that thei slaunder the heade, and the Ci∣tizens ingenerall by their perticuler errours note out the en∣normities of Rome. I see well old iustice is banished, and those that once gaue Lawes to others, ought now to bee restrained and brideled them selues, whervppon brefely thus I conclude, that since the controuersie betwixt you is for the superioritie of the person, and not the dignitie of the subiecte, that the Di∣uine is vnworthie, squaryng from his profession, the Lawyer not alowed of, beyng inconstant in his owne decrees, and the Soldiour lesse to be discommended then you bothe. And that you maie see I ground not vppon light oppinion, giue but eare a little to my tomparison, and I doubt not but to resolue non although you ment to doubt.
It befortuned that three Scithian Brothers after the de∣cease of the King their father, fell in controuersie for the King∣dome, eche of them aleadgyng his owne worthines both in ver∣tue, valew, and nobilttie: the cause beyng doubtfull, the Coun∣saile of the State referred it to a Kyng, a neighbour of theirs, that he might decide the controuersie, he concluded thus, that eche of them armed with Crosbowe and arrowe, should be set in a conuenient place, and he of the three Bretheren whiche could moste nearest strike the harte of the dead Kyng, (whose bodie to that purpose was taken out of the Sepulcher and fa∣stened to a Tree) should succeede hym in the Empire: Vppon this conclusion, the eldest Brother takyng leuell, strooke his father in the breast, yet missyng the harte: The middlemost in the throte: But now the tyme seruyng for the yonger Brother to trie his maisterie, he detestyng to perpetrate so great impie∣tie, cast awaie his Bowe and Arrowe, despising rather the au∣thoritie of a Prince, then willyng to commit suche notable and vnnaturall ennormitie: The whiche the barbarous Kyng no∣tyng, he not onely preferred hym to the Kyngdome, but also worthely recompensed hym with condigne honours. So fareth it at this present with you three Gentlemen, your father (I meane your Countrey whereof you be children and members, I meane Rome that now is) is dead to that it hath been, hauyng buried his manifolde titles of renowne in the errours of his sondrie vngracious Citizens: you his chil∣dren striuyng for succession, that is, indeuouryng for superiori∣tie in the State, are to heare the awarde of me a barbarous Iudge, the whole fortune of Rome hath beene laied for you to leuell at: the eldest (I meane the Deuine) hath pearced the breast, hauyng falne into many errours, as Couetousnesse, In∣continencie, misconstruyng of the Scriptures and what not, displaced one of the Pillers of the State, I meane Militarie profession: Your second brother the Lawyer hath striken bothe necke and breast, not onely beyng corrupt in hymself, but also corruptyng his Science, and with the eldest consented to the banishyng of all warlike defence: The yonger brother, though willyng to possesse, yet loth to wound his fathers corse, repro∣ueth
but the Deuine and Lawyers seuerall vices, not altoge∣ther banishyng them from any title in the State, that is not vouchsauyng to laie bloudie handes on his father, and therfore a comparatis I conclude, he is at this tyme to haue the prehe∣minence in the cause, vntill the Deuine liue better, and the Lawyer amende his misdemeanour. Thus Gentlemen, you maie perceiue my conclusion, if I haue erred in ought, beare with my Imperfections, I meant well, and as I thought so I speake: If my iudgement please not you, I am to referre it to a better learned then my self: and Gentleman Soldiour, you are preferred but with a Prouiso. These three admittyng very well of Simonides discourse, ac∣cordyng to their seuerall affaires, onely the Soldiour deligh∣ted in the varietie of his wit, discoursed thus. Gentleman straunger, your plausible iudgement of late throughly perswades me of your bryngyng vp, and your well ordred behauiour assureth me of your worthie and noble birth, and makes me the willynger, either in courtesie to doe you pleasure, or if my seruice maie any waies stande you in steade, I am readily willyng to aunswere your expectation. Where∣fore, if it shall please you in ought to imploye me, you shall not be more earnest to require, then I willyng to performe. Truely sir (aunswered Simonides) neither will I let slippe your proffered courtesie, nor be vnthankfull for your courtlike affabilitie: If therefore it shall please you to accompanie a straunger, to ouersee the Monumentes of this Citie, I shall in this courtesie be greatly beholdyng vnto you. In breefe be∣yng both agreed, Don Pierro de faragosa, conueyed hym to the most auncient and renowned Monumentes that were to bee seen: at the last attainyng the Market place, thei espied a great assembly of Doctors, Prelattes, and diuers other Citizens: some pleasauntly disposed amongst them selues: some others, greeuously complainyng vppon some iniurie, and to the ende thei might knowe the cause of this turmoyle, the Soldiour de∣maunded what might be the cause: to whom it was aunswered, that if it pleased hym to looke on Pasquius Piller, he should perceiue the whole matter. Wherevpon, takyng Simonides by
the hande, he drewe nere to the colome, on which he found this Inscription. Pasquius Inuectiue, against the lasciui∣ous Pope and his lecherous Cleargie. Mendacem dicere verum quis vetat. WHence growes it that, with coloured charmes, you bleare the Commons eyes O Celestine, tis but in vaine, by craft for to surprise The simple sorte, twas neuer seen, that euer Paule was proude, Or Peter suche, a pompious traine, to Prelat once aloude Who was content, with simple troupe, no Kynges his stirrope helde No triple Crowne, no Crosier staffe, his holy hand did weild But continence, the badge of truth, did rule his holy minde How comes it then, succeedyng hym, thou sweruest from his kinde He neuer bare, the bloudie sworde, was bath'd in Christians blood But mildly suffered, martirdome, to doe the faithfull good Nay rather Neroes, ofspryng thou, thy mothers wombe doest rent With wreakefull tortures, on her limmes, thou tormentes doest frequent Ye Pasquine sees, thy priuie scapes, Popes now in nettes doe daunce Their dalliaunce, is a holy right, they are but chast by chaunce A Curtizan, with holy Lampe, the Chamberlaine lets in Whom holy Pope, with holy Oyle, annoynteth free from sinne Eche Cardinall, maie haue his trull, yet maie not maried bee And why once maried, cloyd with one, not els with two or three Chast Wedlocke hurtes, deuotion now, and Lecherie makes deuoute O wicked tyme, when suche vaine men, doe guide the common route But yet in tyme, proude Celestine, I wishe thee mend thy misse Or Rome shall fall, where now thy pompe, and greatest glorie is Thy Sodomites, thy Baales Priestes, shall be consum'd with fire Thy foule escapes, shall opened be, and Princes hatefull yre Shall turne the walles, of Sodome doune, loe this is Pasquius prophesie Of thee proude Pope, and hatefull Rome, vnlesse you cease iniquitie
Our Soldiour and Simonides ouer readyng this inuectiue, and wonderyng at the Writer, beyng both in a maze departed, but especially the Soldiour who of longe tyme holdyng his peace, at the last was thus interrupted by our amorous Pil∣grim, who said as foloweth. Sir, if it be not displeasaunt to the manifold curtesies that hetherto you haue shewed me, ad this one more, resolue me of this doubt whiche wonderfully busieth my mind, I reade here very straunge inuectiues against our holy Father the Pope, blasphemous exprobrations against the Cleargie, all Rome de∣tected of vnconstauncie, whiche makes me astonied, conside∣ryng that all Nations fetche their preceptes of true Religion from hence, where this libell reporteth vice to be most rife. Don piero aunswered him thus. Truely gentleman if it should please you by faithfull promise to bind your self that you will be secret in what I saie, though it be vnaccostomable to finde such curtesie in this Citie, I will open you my minde. Semo∣nides faithfully vowyng seruice the Soldiour bespake him thus. Rome now adaies (Gentleman) is not Rome whiche should be, our Popes rule by feare not by loue, thei are honoured for their power not pure life, yea, thei are the heades of dissolati∣on and the verie pillers of al lasciuious life, thei are al deuilish∣ly politicke of vnexplicable reuenge: Religious in shewe, hell houndes in their déedes: thei claime of Peter, yet disclaime ver∣tue: thei will be called iust, yet inuert all right: thei will be of God, yet are worldly minded: thei will be Christes Ʋicars, yet be the only distroyers of his flock: thei are inuerters, not faith∣full expositers of the Scripturs: heare is not that chaste life whiche was left in the Apostles tyme, but foule incestious li∣uyng, with filthie and lothesome buggerie: here is no regarde of ciuill Magestrate, but blindnesse cloaketh all thinges, and from hence the vaile of errors spreadeth throughout the whole worlde. Assure your self (good Sir) all this report is true, whiche many men would set open if thei durst: I knowe the escapes of some and lament it, onely my conscience is free before God
of their habomination, though necessitie perforce constraines me vppon vrgent affaires to be here resident. The truth is (Sir) these men are not of God, thei are Pha∣riseis faire spoken Simones Magi blind guides and such like. Forsake therefore this habit good sir, leaue this place if you desire to be vertuous, for here the ill are made worse, the good are made by tormentes to abiure the true profession. Simonides wonderyng at the liberall discourse of this Godly Soldiour, and detesting the abominable hipocrisie of Romishe Prelates (accordyng to Don Pieros good counsaile) refusing the habit of so lothsome a profession, and betakyng him Gar∣mentes beseemyng his degree, hauyng abode ten dayes in the Citie, he bethought him to iourney towardes the noble Citie of Naples, a place noated for Courtlike courtesie and braue be∣hauiour: and thus takyng leaue of the courtious Soldiour he folowed his trauaill. Simonides Iourneying towardes Naples, missyng his waye happened into a Desert, where a straunge aduenture befortuned him. SIMONIDES hauyng Iourneyed long, yet incounteryng with very fewe, by reason whereof hym self altogether igno∣raunt of the waie, he straied into a Desert and wilde Wildernesse, ouergrowne with sundry sortes of vnaccostomable brambles and briers, and the further he traueled, the more the way seemed vncouth, so that it might be thought, the place was only the resceptacle of dispaire, or the Bower which vntoward Suspition had builded, ye ayre seemed as it were with scouldyng Cloudes to aunswere the desertnesse of the place: no melodie was hard there, but onely suche as fed the mynde malancholie, their Progne lamented in more then accostoma∣ble sorowes, the whistelyng Windes yeelded forth such whir∣lyng reportes, as that a man might no otherwise imagine, but
that dispaire did sing the plaine song to those vnaccostomable and sad mournyng descantes. Simonides ouercome with these solitarie asspectes, began to bethinke him self of former sorowes, of his Mistrisse vniust re∣fusall: so that what so euer sorow he could imagine by reason of any euent ouerpassed, was dubbled and redubbled againe, by those vnacquainted and sowre obiectes, that at that verie in∣staunt solicitad his sences. Manigyng him self thus with dolefull contemplation, and pacyng on softly altogether solitarie, he espied at length a huge Rocke, from the toppe whereof into the valies rounde about a siluer Streame descended, compassing it on euery side, saue that the waue, as it were, refusing to shape his course that way, in feare to beholde what there was to bee seene, declined back∣warde, yeeldyng a full streame into the Chanell, whiche made waie by customable reuolutions towardes the Ocean, within which Rocke, Nature her self hath made a solemne habitation: For by castyng his eyes on euery side, Simonides at the last founde an entraunce: into whiche beyng desirous to heare of companie, and willyng to see some noueltie, he sodainly ente∣red: when as behold a wofull Ladie, as it seemed by her morne∣full habit, macerated and made leane with ouerwearyng sorro∣wes, combred with millions of misfortunes was resident: not attired in fashions of Courtlike Damosels, neither did gorgi∣ous Couertures compasse in her golden bushe of heire, but de∣clinyngly it hanged doune along her shoulders and shadowed her face, her eyes made red with restlesse teares began to for∣sake the benefite of light: her often reuerberation of her brea∣stes, make a mournfull replie from the very harte. So that it was to bee thought Dispaire beyng dead, had made this poore Ladie the Anotomie of her self, her habite was so mournfull, her behauiour was so malancholy: who no soner spiyng our a∣morous Spanyard, but rousing her self from her cursed Couch, she angerly inueighed thus. What hatefull Furie hath sent thee hether to bee the behol∣der of my misfortunes, whose vnaccustomable calamities re∣quires no mortall asspect, neither maie be finished but with mi∣serable
death: departe I saie from beholdyng my secretes, who loathes the sight of thee, since thou renuest my sorrowes: and coniure thee to departe from her, that hath sworne to bee com∣fortlesse. Simonides hearyng so discomfortable a discourse, vttered with suche bitter asperitie, at the first could hardly conclude with hymself what to saie: At the last consideryng that vnlesse by her meanes, he might not conceiue a conclusion to light on his right waie, he soberly replied thus. Madame, although your misfortunes driue you into suche extremities, as that not onely companie is lothsome vnto you but also hatefull, yet if it shall please you to consider of me as one inforced by necessitie, not come hether of set purpose, you will the rather beare with my fortune and pardone my escape. The Iourney I pretended was towardes Naples, neither at my passage from Rome imagined I of this place, but For∣tune hath either sent me hether (I thinke Ladie) to bee parta∣ker of your sorowes, or els to perswade you from solitarinesse. Wherefore Madame though your affections bee suche, as hu∣maine societie seemeth loathsome vnto you, yet I beseeche you giue place to an extremitie, and as Fortune hath proffered me to your presence by vnacquainted happ, so graciously I request you, counsaile me towards the accomplishyng of my Iourney towardes Naples hauyng lost my waie, and to the satisfiyng of my hunger, beyng ouerwearied with penurie and painfull tra∣uaile. The Ladie seeyng the gentle and courteous demeanour of the yong Gentleman, greatly commendyng in her mynde the naturall affabilitie of the man, aunswered hym thus. Seeyng by casualtie and not of purpose you are come he∣ther to bee an ouerseer of my Purgatorie, though hereto for I haue disdained any entercourse or enterparle, yet to aunswere your extremities with my readie prouision and simple coun∣saile, you shall not finde me negligent. Whervpon, taking him by the hande, and conueying hym through the wandles of the Caue, she brought hym to the place of her prouision, and cour∣teously placyng the Gentleman on her right hande, with suche
Caates as she had she entertained Simonides. He rather at Meale tyme feedyng on the courtlike behaui∣our of this Votiue, then on the prouision sett before hym, for∣gat his diet by fallyng into a secrete contemplation of her e∣state: whiche the Ladie perceiuyng, recoueryng her self some∣what, makyng her speeches like to the inuincible magnanimi∣tie of her mynde, interrupted hym thus. Signior, it should seeme that you rather feede on some amo∣rous imagination at this instant, then on that is set before you: if that waie you be perplexed, doubt not but either the extremi∣tie of the passion will lightly vade, beyng sleightly conceiued, or grounded on assuraunce growe to some effect. Madame (quoth Simonides) although I must confesse I am bondslaue to Beautie, yet at this present it is neither the me∣morie of any misfortune causeth me to bee sad, nor the remem∣braunce of my Mistris maketh me malancholie, but onely the veiwe of you makes me altogether astonied, in whom beautie beyng resident, sorrowe ouercommeth, with whom although all the signes of a noble and inuincible mynde are conuersant, yet see I a transmutation of your self in your self, and were it not (good Madame) to molest you, I would not onely to ac∣companie my sorrowes, haue some acquaintaunce with yours, but also to confirme my vnable mynde to beare delaies, learne by your renowned valewe, how in extremities I might mai∣ster my affections. The noble and renowned Ladie, conceiuyng the issewe and purpose whereat the yong Spanyard shot, and consideryng by vttered request the inward desire of his mynd, willing (though to her owne sorrowe) to satisfie the Trauailer with courtlike humanitie, she aunswered hym thus. Noble Signior (for your behauiour purposes no lesse) where as I seeke by euery meanes discomforte, and openyng of sor∣rowes is some meanes whereby for a space to lessen them, I shall seeme contrary in my self, and in not aunsweryng your expectation vncourteous to a Straunger: Wherevpon, rather to the pleasuryng of you, then in the decreasing of myne owne sorrow, I will satisfie your expectation so much as in me lieth.
Wherevpon, after our repast was ended, and courteous than∣kes giuen and taken on bothe parties, she brought hym into a solitarie out place of this desolate Caue, wherein not without great foysen of teares, she discouered twoo dead bodies of ex∣quisite proportion, eche one (as it were with auster lookes) ma∣nacyng the other, and bothe of them hauyng eche others Ra∣pier sheathed in his enemies breast: The sodaine sight whereof so amazed Simonides, that what with pitie to beholde, and sor∣rowe to see the Ladies calamitie, he was not able to gouerne his manly passions, but that he vehemently burst into teares, whiche the Ladie perceiuyng comforted hym thus. Gentleman, these teares of yours delare an inward remorse of a noble mynde, and prognosticate vnto you that you are to heare of such a reporte, as might well moue the cruell Tigresse to compassion, maie it please you therefore to rest your self a space here by me, then breefly shall you heare the whole reporte of myne and these twoo murthered Gentlemens Tragicall misfortunes. Simonides acceptyng the courtesie, and seated by her, they bothe hauyng dried vp their brinishe teares, the Ladie discour∣sed thus. I doubt not noble Gentleman, but that the renowne of the noble House of Medici hath bin brought to your eares, whose power and authoritie in this Countrey, hath not onely beene long famous by descent, but also in euery mans mouth, from thence tooke I myne ofspryng, beeyng onely Daughter and heire of Lodouico Gonsasy, who in my prime of youth, at suche tyme as my yong yeares were mellowed with the cheefest per∣fections of Nature, was sought to in waie of Mariage by two yong Italian Princes: the one the Prince of Aucona, called Vascalio, the other Saluanio, Sonne to the Duke of Ʋenice: eche of these with many amorous interscessions, incessauntly laie vpon me for Mariage, and continually solicited my father for his fauour: who tenderly louyng me his yong Daughter called Priseilla, and vnwillyng not to marche me contrary to myne owne likyng, made me free to take my choyce, and to aunswer the expectation of these two yong Princes according
to myne owne fancie. Bothe these yong Princes I fed with delaies, neither preferryng the one, nor refusing the other. Wherevpon, Ʋascalio wearied with my ouerburdensome de∣laie, began to waxe sickly: whiche opertunitie seruyng Salua∣nio very well, he ceased not with continuall courtyngs to coast my affections, not pretermittyng any opertunitie, either to in∣tice by present, or winne fauour by seruice. Notwithstandyng, considering how serious the cause was I had in hand, and how daungerous it were to repulse either the one or the other, I thought it most conuenient to make a staie for a space, in which tyme, either the fancie of the one might be lessened, or the seri∣ous affection of the other extinguished: But alas the while, as thei that are stung with Scorpions, are wont from the harmer to seeke their recure, so these twoo noble Nouices, hauyng their faithfull affections fixed on ye glistering gleames of my youth∣full beautie, thought no other meanes might be had to remedy their misse, but only by the attainemēt of my especiall fauour. Alas that simple feminine beautie, should so bewitch reaso∣nable Nobilitie, or suche misfortunes should befall, by behol∣dyng my declinyng fauour. These yong Gentlemen, desisted not their attempt: for what the one in person preferred with humble submisson, the other proffered in papers with a faithfull assuraunce of loyaltie. In breefe the coales of fancie were kindled, and suche vnacquain∣ted humours at last began to gouerne myne actions, that the fire whiche faine I would haue raked vp in the embers of dis∣cretion, brake out with furie to myne owne confusion: For be∣yng altogether affectionate towardes Saluanio, who (as ill for∣tune serued) was alwaies present with fewell to encrease my fire, helped by opertunitie, and ouercome by his importunitie, at the last I yeelded to the assault, promising hym the full pos∣session of my hart, if he would so moderate himself by a twelue monethes space, as no one token of accordaunce, should fru∣strate my priuate intent: and to the ende that our vndoubted as∣suraunce should neuer bee seperated, I imparted vnto hym a Gemme of approued valewe, assuryng hym that the possession of me, belongeth to him and no other, who continued the custo∣die
of my committed Iewell. Saluanio, rauished with the con∣templation of his good fortune, and gloriyng in the plausible fauour I had bestowed vppon hym, returned to his fathers Court, where with suche great royaltie he demeaned hymself, that the renowne of his towarde proceedinges, was common Table talke amongst our Jtalian Princes. But at last, the other noble yong Gentleman, hauyng con∣sidered with hymself, that absence breedeth forgetfulnesse, and delaie was vnnecessarie in causes of Loue, betooke hymself to walke abroade, and watchyng still for some conuenience to vt∣ter his mynd, especially incited therevnto by the absence of his riuall foe Saluanio, he vnfortunatly on a tyme found me alone in a priuate meditation of my constant Louer, vtterly voyde of myndyng hym, and beyng helped by this opertunitie, he boldly incountered me thus. Madame, the long sorrowes I haue conceiued by your de∣laies, and the earnest zeale that attendeth on my harte, the true loyaltie wherewith I honour you, and the feruent affectes of Loue whiche altogether inforce my thraldome, binde me to be∣seeche your fauour, that either by your graunt of grace I may bee reuiued now almost dead with dispaire: or if your displea∣sure be suche as no fauour will be had, I maie be adiudged, the most infortunate Louer that liueth: Good Ladie, those your glorious eyes, these your exquisit lineamentes, that your seem∣ly behauiour haue applied suche an impression to my harte, as neither Arte can eate out the corrosiue by counsaile, nor life continue if you contemne: For how can the Moone glad the darksome night, if her borrowed light of the Sunne be extin∣guished, or the harte continue in good estate, if the vitall po∣wers be determined. Can I liuyng by your gracious looke, o∣therwise but dye by your frowne. Alas, that harte whiche easi∣ly yeeldeth to like, can hardly brooke to neglect, and that Ar∣rowe whiche hath wounded myne eye with reflection, will ne∣uer be losened but by the asspect of beautie: So that in your re∣pulse, I am tied to such extremitie, either to liue a dying crea∣ture, beeyng manaced by your cruell contempt, or els dye on myne owne sworde, to auoyd the furie of an euerlastyng Pur∣gatorie.
Wherevppon good Ladie, make an ende of my tor∣mentes, or increase it to the vttermost: My desertes, my faith, my true affection craue a gracious acceptaunce: my birth not the basest: my riuall Signior Saluanio, satisfied but with a looke is flidge and awaie: I continue constaunt, rest yours, serue for you, liue by you, and without your fauour shall dye forsaken through your repulse. I hauyng giuen hym scope to discourse, not forgettyng the Idoll of myne owne fancie, and repliyng vppon the continu∣aunce of his faith, aunswered my Lorde Vascalio thus. My noble Lorde, I am sorrie that ought should bee in me, whereby either your health should be impared by my delaie, or your passion remedilesse in my repulse, for that the faate that waiteth on me, hath prefixed me a companion, where though your worthinesse deserueth to inioye one more to bee esteemed then my self: yet my fortune is suche, that vntill my appointed houre fall out, I may not be fortunate in Mariage noble Vas∣calio: Therfore, since it is not in my self to appoint the limits, but that I am bounde to the direction of tyme, and cheefly to a priuate affection that gouerneth me, I must craue your par∣don, besechyng you to learne that one lesson of Sandalio, which he practiseth, that in vnnecessare sorrowes, and womans repul∣ses, you neuer trouble your self with harte breakyng, when as the cheefest commoditie once gotten it is scarsly beneficiall. And thus not respectyng his replie, I left the solitarie Gentle∣man in his solemne aspectes, who altogether amazed at my confused spéeches and sodaine departure, being desperat of his attempt, and out of all hope to attaine my fauour, betooke him self contrary to the nobilitie of his name, to such vnacquainted and malancholie sorrowes, that he refused companie, and like Timon of Athens, he became the onely Misauthropos of the world: His delight in nought but in sower discourses: his muse wityng nothyng but lamentable laies, and for that he desired a place seuerall to hymself, and agreeable to the agonies that ouerwearied hym, he by long trauaile did light vpon this De∣sert: Here with wofull remembraunce of my repulse, and with lamentable recorde of his misfortune, he abode for the space of
fower monethes, in whiche tyme all these recordes which you see here of his cursed mishappe, he affixed within this his and my Purgatorie, whiche to the more satisfaction of your mynd, before you passe any further you maie ouerlooke. Wherevpon, discoueryng a Table of Allablaster, in Ciphers as it seemed written with his owne bloud, was regestred his misfortune in these tearmes. NOT noble birth, alas vnhappie man Could conquer beautie, neither by desert Doth Cupid leuell, why repinst thou than Ʋaine wretch, from Cradles rocke turmoyld thou art To bide these woes: then since thy froward fate Prefixt thy torment, glorie in thy state. Faith was the first, that linkt this lastyng loue, Death is the last, thy sorrow must alay Beauties repulse, inforst me to remoue From stately Court, into this desert way Here leade J on, my life that loue may see My zeale was suche, as scarce the like may bee. Here leaue J lines, of vnacquainted stile Set downe with Incke, of vnaccustomde hewe VVhat here my Pensil wrote, my thoughter while Engrau'd within, my harte for loue to vewe Myne inward woes, the Pouers may looke on For outward lines, they serue when J am gon. Infortunatus miser & quid non.
Vpon the Testerne of his bed, as it seemed made of Cipris, and squared with euen proportions, was left this Monument. THou witnisse of my woe, my carefull bed Tell forth my nightes repose, if ought it be Ʋnto the world, speake is thy maister dead VVhat freed from thrall, tell truth how resteth he Alas my couch, thou knowest as well as J My sleapes are sighes, and from my waking eyes My lukewarme teares, be wet me as J ly And if by chaunce, a slender sleape surprise My lustlesse lookes, in sighyng dreames J say Repulsed wretch, disdaine this hatefull light Since beautie daines, to daunt thee with denay Thus with a sigh, J breake forth out of sleep Condemnyng that, repose J neuer had Thou knowest those houres, I pointed haue to weep Compare the tymes, and cipher out my glad But figure forth my woes, not one nor three Make euery mone, a million if thou please Thou shalt not erre, the count shall passe from me Keepe thou thy tale, so if that fortune please VVhen J am dead, to sende a second slaue For to succeede, Vascalios vowed vaine Reporte to hym, the nightes J passed haue And in comparyng myne, his proues no paine. Infortunatus miser & quid non.
Simonides, hauyng ouer read these Sonettes, the Ladie be∣gan againe to continue her discourse thus. These tokens and monumentes of this poore Gentleman, Noble Signior, are sufficient to open you the Jtalians martir∣dome, whose mishapes (as it seemeth) the powers pitiyng, by misfortune droue a Noble gentleman of Jtaly (a verie singu∣ler fauourer of Ʋascalios) into this Desert, who lightyng by aduenture on this caue, encountered with our Duke of Anco∣ua, and agreued with the sight of his miserable estate, perswa∣ded him with suche and so probable demonstrations, as at laste the Nable youth began to recouer him selfe, yet altogether re∣solut to continue in his vowed mantion, neuerthelesse, reple∣nished with a lingeryng hope whiche by his freendes perswa∣sion was trained on, and thus it was concluded betwen them, that accordyng to the necessitie of the cause (seeyng no other meanes woulde be wrought for the Princes saftie) by subtell conueyaunce from my fathers house to steale me awaie into this inaccessable Desert, whereas force perforce persistyng in my prowd contempt, thei might compell me to mercie, or pu∣nish my contumacy. Wherevpon, Polibius (for so the Gentle∣man called) hauyng taken his leaue of the Prince of Ancoua, and beyng determined vppon his plighted promise to practise the conuayance of me, came vnluckily into my fathers Court, at that verie instant, when as inpacient of delayes, and repen∣taunt of my yeares conditions, I had compacte with certaine of the court to haue stolne awaie towardes Venice. Polibius verie circumspect in that he went about, had lear∣ned out the certaintie of my escape, and which waie I preten∣ded to trauaile, by one of my priuate Handmaides, whom one∣ly in that cause I faithfully trusted, and loth to let slippe the opertunitie, with certaine of his retinew (whom he had armed to the purpose) about two leages from my fathers house, vn∣horsing, and putyng to flight all those that were in companie and of my conspiracie, whiche done, he violently by the helpe of his associates, mounted me behinde him selfe, and without knowledge of any what he pretended, in post hast he galloped towardes this Desert, by such vnacquainted waies, as vnlesse
the Desert groues, no one mortall creature resounded an Ec∣cho to my exclamations. But now knowyng him self to be free frō persute, and that the tyme required to open vnto me the effecte of his pretence, he softly pacyng his hackney, courtiously spake vnto me thus. Madame, your iniurious exclamations, grounded on no Noble demeanure, in vnnecessary occasions, argue small staiednes. Thinke not that I either haue attempted a rauish∣ment of Nobilitie, for I detest it, or a matter contrarious to Honour for I am noble, but moued by the pitious martirdome of a noble Gentleman my frend, & disdainyng your rude refu∣sall, I haue determined to make an end of his sorrowes, and to counsaile you to make your mercie aunswerable to the excel∣lencie of your renouned beautie: what gracious mynd affected with the least benefite of nature, vnlesse swalowed vp in the vn∣iust gulf of disdaine, but would pitie the passions of poore tor∣mented Ʋascalio, who onely for your loue Madame Priscilla, hath abandoned his pompious traine, his accostomable Glo∣rie, and onely acquainted himself with the solitarinesse of this vnaccessable Desert. Wherevppon, if euer mercy preuailed with chast beautie, finishe vp his martirdome, and conclude a peace betwene both your fancies, for to this onely end haue I practised this attempt, and for his rocouerie (Madame) do you accompanie me here to this Desert. I hearyng his faire and smooth deliuered speaches, though altogither cōfounded with susspition, yet now resolued of the occasion, incensed with hatefull disdaine against both him, his frend, and his attempt, bitterly inuaied against him thus. Vngracious Rauisher, it is neither thy painted glozes shall make me lauishe of myne Honour, neither thy sugered per∣swasions withdraw me from my resolutions: myne affections fetchethe not their limites from smilyng similitudes, neither inforced will I make saile of mine Honour, wretched caitife as thou art, thinkest thou the blood of the Medices, is either ter∣rified with a simple threat, or confirmed with a courtious re∣quest, the onely limites of thy reuenge is my destruction, thy vnreasonable demaund is more odious vnto me then death, re∣solue
the of thy exigent, for I am determined of my purpose. Nay then replied Polibius, what faire wordes will not per∣swade, force shall bryng to end, thou art not to looke in this Desert (disdainfull Ladie) for flockes of frendes, but in con∣tempt of Nobilitie that reuerenceth the reuengyng foes, and to conclude in breefe, vnlesse your actions sauour out better of lenitie then pure wordes, you shall find quickly what the diffe∣rence is betweene aspeare speaches and austeare execution. In these and like tearmes we ouerpassed the tediousnesse of our trauaile, it was Ʋascalios happe to espie vs a farre of, who (poore Gentleman) rauished but with the imagination of my beautie, and doubtfull of the euente was to followe, sounded breathlesse, so yt at our ariuall, Polibius espiyng him for dead, ouerwronge with intollerable impatience, laiyng violent handes vppon me, vnsheathed his Rapier, brandishyng the blade ouer my heade, gaue me this cold comfort. Thou ingratfull Tigresse, sproung of the loynes of Magera, not from the ofspring of the Noble house of Medici, receyue the guerdon of thy cōtempt, who gloriest in the fall of so noble a Prince as Vascalio: wherevppon readie to execute his furie, vnfortunatly the poore Louer recouered, who spiyng the in∣tention of Polibius, castyng him self prostrate at his frendes feet, besought him thus. Oh Polibius, by the Honour of the noble name thou bearest, by that inuyolate Nobilitie as is in thee, by that constaunt pro∣mise thou hast kept towardes me, I beseeche thee vouchsafe to staie thy handes from practising so horrible impietie, and let me (by whom the errour first sprounge, and whose fonde affec∣tions haue procured these extremities) make onely this action tragicall by my proper fall, alas seest thou not (sweete freend) how consumed alredie with sorow, I staie but the summons of the Sisters, yeeld therefore the vnhappiest man that liueth the rest he seeketh for, and liue thou sweet Priscilla, to see the faith∣full end of constant Ʋascalio. Polibius wateryng his cheekes with teares, as the true to∣kens of his wofull harte brake, replied thus. Nay noble Duke vnhappie were I, if to lessen thy sorowes
I would not make satisfaction with my owne bloud, for whose onely cause I haue attempted this action, the whiche the hea∣uenly powers bryng to a good end. Wherevpon, turnyng him self once more towardes me his eyes altogether bleared with wayling, he intreated me thus. Ladie, if euer gracious suppliauntes suite preuailed in your mercifull mynde, disdaine not to accept the submission of suche a petition as for his constauncie, deserueth the noblest Parra∣gon in the worlde, you see how interchaunable sobbes inter∣rupt his speeches, and what the tongue in termes should vtter, the harte aboundantly perswadeth by the euacuation of tea∣res: see how on bended knees he beseecheth: beholde him here that with gentle perswasions intreate, that his loue is con∣stant: Consider but this, you are here at his owne power, where neither your feminine weakenesse could resist, nor any reasons hinder your Rape: yet see the noble Gentleman, who not one∣ly reliyng in your fauour where he might commaund, reque∣steth: where he might inforce, praieth: Pitie therefore (good Ladie) his passion, and make an ende of these Tragicall dis∣coursinges with a Comicall conclusion. Vascalio, to these per∣swasions added this humble exortatorie. Oh thou the Mistris of my life, if my vnmeasurable tor∣mentes, were an eyes obiecte, I doubt not but to accompanie this Rocke, you would yeeld to ruth, who were thei not sence∣lesse, I know could not be silent deare sweete, my passions are so vehement, as I am at this instaunt, to require your conclu∣sion but in these two thinges: the one, either to graunt me your gracious and fauourable acceptaunce, or els with this sworde to finishe my sorrowes. I ouerwearied with these wofull exhortations, submissions and lamentations, conclusiuely aunswered hym thus. Signior Ʋascalio, I had thought Nobilitie would haue so wrought with you, as that consideryng my reasonable conclu∣sion, you would not thus haue attempted my voyolation per∣force, nor your cruell Polibius in choloricke opinion vouchsa∣fed to haue sheathed your sworde in a Virgines entralles, but sith the vnconstauncie of lust blindeth one, and crueltie ouer∣gouerneth
the other, I wil make waie to both your affections: wherevppon, my finall conclusion is this, that it maie please you bothe to determine my death and to saue myne Honour: and for my self, I am resolued, neuer to loue nor like any other then he that hath my harte, whiche is Signior Saluanio, who ha∣uyng title to me, shall receiue this honourable reporte of my constauncie, that death rather liked Priscilla, then faithflesse breache of promise. These two Gentlemen hearyng my vnhappie resolution, hauing priuatly discoursed together, Polibius taking his horse and leauyng me to the mercie of my captiuate seruaunt, be∣tooke himself by a contrary waie to his owne Castle, Ʋascalio, with his naked Rapier in his hande, accompanied onely with me his disdainefull Mistris, and millions of imaginations compassyng in hymself whiche waies to mittigate my furie. Alas the while, how inscrutable be the reuolutions of the Pla∣nettes, at this very instaunt, Saluanio seuered from his traine, and hauyng lost his waie betweene Naples and the next Citie Rome, infortunatly came in place, whom no soner I espied, but with often exclamations, I brought him to the finishyng of his owne life: for hauyng spied me claspt in the armes of his riuall foe, incensed with greate furie, with naked weapon he assailed Vascalio, who readie to withstand his force, at one instaunt, eche of them vnfortunatly sheathed their weapons in either others bodie, wallowyng together in their owne bloud, and seuerall reportyng this one speeche successiuely, Priscilla Vascalio was constauntest, Priscilla Saluanio was constauntest: and in these and suche like exclamations, yeelded vp the ghost. I pale and wanne for feare not knowyng whom to succour nor what to atempt, fell starke dead in a traunce at both their feet for a long time, till at the last recoueryng my self, after I had bathed both their bodies with floodes of my teares, and sacrificed to their gostes with the offalles of my heare, vowed here to finish my life, and conueiyng their bodies (as you see) into this caben, here haue I kept them these fiue yeres, myn∣dyng in recompence of bothe their honourable affections and my vniust foresight, to recompence with some seruice to their
deade bodies, and finish my life with them here, whose liues was but death beyng refused by me. Thus haue I breefly reported vnto you (noble Gentleman) the whole discourse of my misfortune, whose mishappes are so manyfold, as neither death can determine them, nor life led in miserie, in parte satisfie the perfection of these two noble Gen∣tlemen here dead. Simonides astonied at this tragicall discourse, whiche séemed to abridge the fame of those of more auncient memorie, began in this sort to open his opinion. Truely Madame, the misfortunes of these two worthy per∣sonages, togither with your resolution, makes me presuppose, that all honourable affection, is here onely in Jtaly, and con∣stant retribution, in the ladies of this countrie, I finde my self benefited in this my misfortune, that seeyng feminine perfec∣tion so much, I maie valiauntly continue the assault, though hetherto by repulse I haue been still afflicted, and though the breach be alredie made, and the assaylaunt entered, yet to keep one skonce sure against the sowers of disdaine. Happie is Signior Ʋascalio, (in my fancie noble Lady) who hath determined his Tragedie, and left a singuler confirmati∣on of his constancie, euen before his eyes who onely was the sole mistris of his harte, leauyng that person here beyng dead, to blazon out his renowne, whom liuing he honoured with lo∣yall and constant seruice. Straunge is it to see, the stratagemes of this life, how one death aswell deuoureth ye surest constant, as most disloiall, one mould vouchsafeth both noble and in noble, whereas the desart of the one required diefiyng, the escape of the other shamful re∣proche, and scarce worthy the benefite of sepulture. And wonderfull are these effectes, when nature shal vouch∣safe to admit, that is vnnaturall towardes nature. The contra∣rieties of your affections (I meane Vascalio and yours) altogi∣ther contrarious, yet were thei one, for what you wished, your poore suppliaunt desired, yea, what you imagined to dispossesse him, he turned to the honouryng of you. But I see, the opening of greene woundes is daungerous,
and the remembraunce of misfortunes newly past, procure a bitter disgestion of anticendentes: wherevppon (Madame) I had rather bee silent to slake your sorowe, then taulkatiue to augment myne owne greefe: yet I besech you, beare with my presumption, and vouchsafe humble thankes at my handes for your doolefull discourse, and farther if it please you, let me not want your direction, toward the accomplishing of my iourney. Madamisella Priscilla, allowyng of Simonides discourse, yet altogither vnwillyng he should long abide with her, after she had with honourable semelines cōuaied him to a path waie towarde Naples, and directed hym in what she might, toward the accomplishyng of his desire, not forgettyng to learne out his name, birthe, cause of trauaill, and suche like wherein she stoode in doubt, she courteously gaue hym this farewell at par∣tyng. Sith Fortune (amorous Spanyard) hath with like repulse afflicted thee as it hath Vascalio, she hath to this ende sent thee hether to learne of Ʋascalio, and if thy Mistris contumacie dis∣daine thy courtesie, doubt thou not but she maie bee made par∣taker of my hard happe: Perseuer thou therefore (noble Simo∣nides) in faithfull affection, so in the ende thou shalt reape re∣nowne for thy labour. This saied, she courteously betooke her to her vowed Mansion, and after some reuerent salutations presented by Simonides, he passed forward on his Iourney, and not pretermittyng the cautions the courteous Ladie had pre∣fixed hym, he at last ouercame the tediousnesse of the solitarie Desert, and came into the high waie toward Naples. In iour∣neying he met with diuers, who vppon sundrie affaires were trauellyng to that Citie, and as diligence ouercommeth all te∣diousnesse, so with the good companie he met withall, and the expedition thei altogether made, thei might behold the Toune whiche so long thei had wished for.
¶ How Simonides ariuyng at Naples, was entertained by his Countrey man Fredericke de Cicuta, sometymes a gallant Courtier, but now a Carthusian Frier. SIMONIDES beyng thus ariued at Naples, a famous Citie and Towne of Garrison, was no soner entered the Port, but he was staied by the court of Guarde, and was presented before the Viceroy of the Citie, who finding out by his reports, that he was a trauelling Straunger, cau∣sed hym courteously to bee conueied to a conuenient lodgyng in the Citie, where he might imploye hymself as he pleased. Simonides reposing hymself for that night, on the morrowe questionyng with his Host what Straungers were habitaunt in the Citie, he reported vnto hym, that amongst the Carthu∣sians (a Secte of Friers instituted by Bembo of Paris) there was at that instaunt inuested a Gentleman of Nobilitie, a Spanyard once renowned for his holy life, though heretofore he had bin a Courtier of singuler brauerie within that Citie, and hauyng learned his name, whiche was Fredericke de Cicuta, he likewise sought the meane to finde hym out, and beyng pre∣ferred to his speech by the licence of the Superintendent or Pro∣uost, he saluted hym thus. Signior, beeyng ariued a Straunger in this Citie, and vn∣derstandyng by reporte of your beyng here, who are (as I am enformed) my Countrey man, I thought it a poinct of wise∣dome, to acquaint my self with one of myne owne Nation, and a parte of ciuilitie, to visite a Gentleman of such renowne as I vnderstand you to be of, willyng, if you haue any seruice wher∣in to commaunde me, if it bee your pleasure at any tyme to im∣ploy me, you shall finde me more willing to performe, then you readie to commaunde. Frier Fredericke hauing giuen him the Baseles manes (after
the fashion of our Napolitan Courtiers) aunswered hym thus. It can not bee courteous Gentleman, that my Countrey man a straunger, should want any seruice I maie accomplishe, espe∣cially, perceiuing you to be a Gentleman, and willing to grow into the high way of experiēce, wherfore if you please to walke with me, into my priuate Cell, you shall accordyng to myne a∣bilitie be welcomed, and if in the Citie I can doe you any cur∣tesie, doubt not but you shall commaunde me. Wherevpon, thei bothe passyng to the fornamed place, and hauyng discoursed of the causualties of their Countrey, they recommended eche vnto other, the originall cause of their tra∣uaile, of their birthe, abode, and suche like: in the ende, Frier Fredericke, demaunded of Simonides, the cause of his departing from Ciuill, and why he trauailed towardes Naples, whom Si∣monides satisfied thus. Religious Father, your reuerent eares should hardly daine (considering the subiect) to vouchsafe the hearing of a discourse so vnnecessarie, especially, since my cause of trauaile standeth on suche nice pointes, as ere I had resolued to departe Ciuill, I was almost at Rome. My yong yeares (as you see) subiect to sundry impressions, at last tooke holdfast on vnstaied Loue, and myne eyes beyng curious in regardyng Beautie, fixed them at last vnremoueably on the blaze of a faire Damosell called Clarinda, whom (accordyng to custome) when I had eft cour∣ted, yet neuer conquered, impacient of delaies, I desperatly left Ciuill, trauailyng to vnknowne Cities, led by this resolu∣tion, that by sight of many thyngs, I should learne something, and in returnyng home constaunt in loue, and accompanied with many good qualities, I should be better welcomed to my Clarinda. On this ground I haue seen Ferrara, visited Ʋenice, past through Genoua, attained Rome, where inticed by the ge∣nerall reporte of the nobilitie and courtlike behauiour of Na∣ples, I am come hether to weete if the brauerie bee correspon∣dent to that I haue heard, the demeanure so commendable as it is esteemed of. These breefly are the causes of my trauaile, somewhat I haue seene els where, and now what I looke for here, if by your meanes I might, (good Countrey man) I
would gladly accomplishe. And was it Loue (noble Simonides saied Fredericke) that made you leaue Ciuill, truely an vniust cause to aduenture tedi∣ous trauaile, for small or no commoditie: It is a greate errour (Countrey man) that made you amorous: it was not the ga∣rishe beautie of your Mistris, the aluryng raies of her eyes, he exquisite feature of her bodie that captiuated your sences, but an idle mynde of yours, inclinyng to no good exercise, and dis∣dainyng orderly aduertisementes, which vouchsafed to follow suche inconstant groundes as these be: for it neuer falleth out but where Idlenesse is predominaunt, that Loue preuaileth: for where heauenly contemplation occupieth the mynde, and orderly functions employ the bodie, the soule disdaineth to like of dust and ashes, the bodie subdued by discretion, becommeth not desolute. If wee keepe as dutifull dispositions of our ty∣mes, as the limitations of Nature hath prescribed vs, our er∣rours should bee finished in an instaunt, our vertues encreased euery hower: for as all thynges maie bee recouered but losse of tyme, so vnlawfull pleasures should bee no reasonable mans companions. I haue knowne of many Louers thus muche, that for a lit∣tle pleasure in their youth, thei haue proued vnwildie men in their age: but for those that in youth haue been Studientes in Philosophi, in their declinyng yeares thei haue proued Philoso∣phicall, and not troubled with distempreture of bodies. If you knew therefore Simonides, what it is to compasse the tyme, nei∣ther loue should preuaile though it assault you, nor vaine plea∣sures conquer you when you are well armed with happie exer∣cise. For he that distinguisheth tymes well, and compares the commoditie of his houres reading to his daies lotering, would wishe his daies spent in Loue, readyng howers: and repent e∣uery minute let slippe, with a thousand sighinges. For by how muche we ouerpasse our daies in idle exercise, by so muche we abridge the limites of our happinesse: & by how much we aply our mynde to blinde and amorous actions, by so muche we dis∣possesse our mynde of the most blessed benefites of reason. In studiyng to attaine Loue, wee are recompenced with small re∣warde:
In studiyng to possesse Vertues, what one thyng maie be compared to our blessednesse. In possessyng suche transito∣rie pleasures, as Loue is, a man is enuied at by his Riuall: In attainyng the inscrutable benefite of verteous & sacred know∣ledge, a man is reuerenced euen by his Enuiers. So that you see, the slothfull amorous man, is tamed and made lesse then a man by his follie and negligence, where contrarie, he is most happie and blessed, that fearyng to be idle, is not content to bee a man, and indeuouryng in honest exercises, is a demy God by his vertues. Oh Simonides, I speake all this to this ende, that thou shoul∣dest see thy follies, and in seeyng them subdue them in thy self: for in those onely actions, wee proue our selues reasonable, wherein we subdue suche contrary affectes, as withstande ad∣uisement, and maister those fleshly passions, as altogether dis∣possesseth our happinesse: For it is a point of reason, to distin∣guishe good from ill, so is it the parte of a reasonable man to followe the better and flye the worse. These considered (good Countrey man) for your first parte of trauaile you can not but confesse it to bee grounded on small reason: yet notwithstan∣ding, I will with you confirme this, that by it you haue gotten experience: and whereas here you are ariued to learne the fa∣shions of Court, whatsoeuer by eye sight your self shall per∣ceiue, I by my experience can alreadie laie open: and not onely describe you a Courtier in all his colours, but also open vnto you the imperfections that proceede from their profusednesse: wherevpon, if it please you to yeeld attentiue eare, I am deter∣mined to begin my Narration. The Court of Naples here renowned by the excellencie of this Signior that now gouerneth it, hath incited many young men (hauyng the raine in their owne neckes) to resorte hether, where bothe by the serenitie of the ayre, thei maie haue assu∣raunce of their health, and by the brauerie of the Court, satisfie their youthly humours. Othersome, by their fathers appoint∣ment (in hope of preferment) are sent hether to bee attendaunt on the Ʋiceroy, who by their good deseruynges, either are to growe in fauour, or by their valewe and force of Armes, are to
be confirmed with Marciall honour. These intentions, makes the Court here so ample as it is, and so accompted as it seemes to be: For the first sorte of noble Courtiers, as their humours are, suche their retinewe is: vaine heades are attended on by se∣ducyng Flatterers: Follies worke altogether maisters with them: Fashions make them of comely Personages disguised Maskers. Idlenesse, of able Gentlemen lasciuious Mecocks: Their feates of Armes, are turned to a Sinquipace: Thei had rather tread a tricke of one and twentie follies, then performe an action that might increase honour. Suche are the dispositions of these sorte of Gentlemen, that if thei erre in ought, thei are soothed in the same: if thei delight to be praised, the Flatterer will preuaile: if to bee reuerenced, thei shall haue capp and curtesie: if for title of credite, thei shall bee worshipped and reworshipped: if lasciuious and wanton, thei shall want no priuie Brokers: if riotous, who doubtes but Spendthriftes will haunt them: if daintie in diet, thei must haue a Frenche Cooke: if fashionatiue, the Towne shall bee sought for an inuenting Tayler: So that at the last some plea∣des purse emptie, and very many are non suited of al their cost∣ly attire: and the Farmer in dischargyng the Marchauntes bookes, hath either his Lease renued or continued for euer. It is a straunge thyng to see, how in Courte our daintie Nobles braue it, desiryng rather to feed their Mistris eye with delicate aspect, then maintaine the distressed Soldiour with necessarie prouision: yet in this, I altogether blame not the Gentleman, whereas (perhappes as Court fashion is) pleasing of humours is most profitable: he desiryng to bee a Penifather will venture his stake amongst the rest, but where one spéedeth a hundred faile, who ouer runne with arerages, are faine them selues to pull downe their bristles, and to settle their sailes lo∣wer to auoyde the Perrie of perdition. Truely now adaies (Signior Simonides) the fashion of Na∣ples is suche, as fauour preuaileth with many by occasion, not by desart: by opinion, not by worthinesse: And now since peace makes all plentious, Gentlemen will bee delicate: Ladies a∣morous: the Prince perhappes studious. And though not see∣yng
all ennormities, yet compassed about with many that bee enormous. Our Courtiers now adaies, from the practise of the Launce, haue learned to loue: perhappes in remembraunce of their for∣mer endeuours, thei will turnie a course or two to please their Mistris: but for olde daylie experience, whiche inureth the bo∣die to assaultes, alas, thei are to combersome, we must none of them, but if our Mistris like of a codpeece Dublet, it shall cost them the settyng on but it shall bee had: If short Breeches, all Padua shall be searched for them. So that now from the En∣glishman, our Italians haue stolne their portrature, and they must now bee pictured naked, with a paire of Sheares in his hande, thei are so combred with newe fashions and inuentions. In the Court of Naples, now Aristides for his plainesse shall be thrust out, and Aristippus for his nicenesse preferred. Crisip∣pus with his sweete eloquence shall preuaile, where Cato with his sowre censures shall be mislikt. When Damocles flattereth fastest he shal be preferred sonest, where if any seuere Calistines reprehended he should be punished. Although in this Court we haue sundrie wise men, yet some∣thyng maie slippe thei can not see all, and where so many mat∣ters are so often debated, no maruaile though reason bee some∣thyng abated. Pithagoras with his owne hande, wrote this Inscription on his Schoole doore. Who so knoweth not what he ought to knowe, is a beast amongst men, He that knoweth no more then he hath need of, is a man amongst beastes, He that knoweth that maie be, is a God amongst men. It maie well bee a iust Prince might prescribe this before the Court of Naples, but should he enter into the examination of the Premisses, I feare me he might worthely condemne the most, who ought to knowe that excesse is vnnecessarie, and yet our Courtiers doe commonly vse it, and therefore brutishe: Many we haue that knowe no more then thei neede of, and yet but men amongst brute beastes: but for those that knowe all
thynges, thei are but Pauci quos equus amauit Jupiter at{que} ar∣dens euexit ad athera virtus. Let Traian prescribe good lawes for eternall memorie, and yet where are thei sooner broken then in the Court of Traian. Let Marcus aurelius store his Court with wisemen, yet euen there thei waxe dissolute. And our Court guise here is suche, that in shorte space we learne to knowe what is ill, but for that is good, we can hardly compasse it in a long season. And how can it otherwise bee, that where all thynges are ministred to please the appetite, that reason should preuaile: where all stu∣dies are to inuent vices, we should admitt vertue: where all our exercises are amorous, any one endeuour should be Philo∣sophicall: Custome inuerteth all thynges: Errour destroyeth all thynges, where onely similitudes serueth the Court, what shall become of substaunce. Truely if Catos censer, had as greate authoritie in our Na∣politan Court as he had in Rome, and if the Animaduersions of Idlenesse, were as austere here as thei were in his gouernmēt it was then, I feare me some of our nice Courtiers should kisse the Marmotiue, and beare those corrections, whiche be fitted their follies. In his gouernment, all Rome banished Idlenesse: in our go∣uernment, noted vices growe and encrease Idlenesse: where∣vpon, it proueth that the brauest Soldiour, is become the com∣monest Courtier, and the furie of the sworde is supplied, with the fame of the tongue: the mediocritie in diet and attire, to banquettyng in diet and brauerie in attire. Thus our whole Courte by Idlenesse is made dissolute: by custome corrupt: where fashions fixe follie, follie breedes vanitie, bothe incon∣staunt. This Courte in elder age, was accompted the Mother of Wisemen, the stepdame of Fooles: where now, a Foole shall glorie of more fauour, then the Wiseman of acceptaunce: And no maruell since the worlde as now runneth at this rate, that as Mothes eate the cloath, and the Cankerworme pearceth the Tree, so flatteryng Sicophantes beguileth all the worlde. But for those sortes that depende on their desartes, alas the
while, I pittie their misfortunes, thei wantyng power and abi∣litie to maintaine a parte, are put backe from compassyng be∣nefite, and if in striuyng to arise thei haue but one faune of for∣tune, those eyes that looke into al procedinges, and are watch∣full onely to their owne profites, will preuent them, turnyng them of with a little preferment, not sufferyng them to rise to hie, for lickyng the fatt from their fingers, so that now adaies Promotion is determined in suche sorte, as fansie rather con∣firmeth the election then discretion, in so muche that desarte maie now goe a beggyng when all the worlde is guided by o∣pinion. But whereas we haue but lookt a little into the priuate ac∣tions, attire, and externall practises of their life and founde so muche errour, if we but now consider the inwarde disposition of the mynde, of troth you maie wonder. The whole state of them tooth and naile, by all possible meanes from their first ri∣sing vp affectate honour, not by those meanes that are requi∣red in men of liberall mynde, but altogether accordyng to the nature of those thei depende of. If Phaleris will torment, Pe∣rillus will inuent: If Aemilius will martir, Paterculus will minister: If Alexander will be stately, Photion will be hum∣ble: If Domitius foolishe, Hipodamus will be franticke, euery greate mans vaine shall haue a follower, and by these steppes of soothing Gouerners phantasies now adaies, our Courtiers seeke to clime, rather thē by any other action that is commen∣dable: So though the honour thei attaine make thē renowned in the face of the world, yet the meanes wherewith thei attaine are odious in the opinion of the wisest. For what can bee more discommendable, then for a noble mynd to applie it self to ser∣uile functions? What booteth Nobilitie, where the man ma∣kes hymself abiect? If glorie amidst the vniuersall benefites of fortune be cheefest, (for that it is the onely recorde of vertue, and vertue by no other meanes is to bee atchiued but by honest endeuours) I count hym infortunate that by contrarious step∣pes would clime to it, and seeking by vniust meanes to attaine beyng vnmeete for it. As for those honours that dependeth vppon the opinion of
Princes, as it is conceiued so feareth it in an instaunt: Those titles of renowne in true glorie passe by desarte: in fained pre∣ferment are committed by casualtie: the proude borroweth the state and title of the humble: the humble of the proude: For where the Iudgement is in an vndiscreete eye, how can it o∣therwise be, but that all thynges must passe by opinion. It was true honour grounded on desarte, that preferred Fabius to the title of Maximus: It was the austere actions of Marilius, that made hym to bee tearmed Jmperiosus in vndoubted re∣nowne. Therefore we see Simonides, the preferment without counterfaite, but in fained and momentany glorie (which bea∣reth no small swaie in this Court) all runnes by hearesaies. But this I dare boldly affirme, that if honours were to bee compast by vices, as in olde Rome thei were by vertues, there would more proue honourable (in our Court of Naples) in one yeare, then Rome had of good men in a whole age. How many Democriti should we haue, that would deride al men accomptyng them mad, when he hymself was out of his witt? How many Epicuri that are led altogether with sensuall lust, yet disdaine the strickt life of others. Truely if our Napolitans, had euery parte of their bodies, accordyng to the number of fashions they weare, they should haue Flemishe heades to their Dutche hattes: Frenche faces to their marquisotted cutt: Parisian neckes to their Parris ruffes: Italian bodies to their bigge bellies: Millian buttocks to their mincyng Breeches: Spanish legges to their Spanish Stockynges: Englishe feete to their Englishe Pantoffies: And if euery Countrey for his fashion might craue a member, I thinke it were more wisedome in equall distribution of eche Countre is parte, then witt to acquaint our members with so many Countrey fashions. Truely it were better for a Courtier with the Atlantibae, rather to want his name, then good nurture: for vnnamed his honour shall not grow in question, but spoken of, his vices shall be noted. But to let slippe our men Courtiers, with their affectation of honour, with their vnorderly meanes to attaine renowne,
let vs now turne to our Courtlike Ladies, and wee shall finde there was not so much varietie in the one, but there is twise as muche vanitie in the other: the Gentleman is not so foolishe, but the Gentlewoman is euen as fonde: so that bothe of them are coupled in a lease of agreeable follies: the one to followe, the other to intice. These Damoselles can make Emperours idle as Authony: Valiaunt men effeminate as Hercules: wise∣men dissolute as Salomon: Eloquent men lasciuious as Au∣relius: their eyes haue power attractiue: thei neuer prie but thei pearce: neuer glaunce but thei conquer, so that none but Mer∣curie, can abridge their sleightes to entrap: nor ought but wise∣dome, preuaile against their sugred inticementes. I haue kno∣wen the brauest Courtier in Naples, to daie brauely mounted trauesing the Streates, richly demeined, brauely attired, and beyng ouercome but by a glauncyng passion, the next daie in mynde malancholie: in habite mournefull: in gate inconstant: nay, in all actions not hymself, suche pearce haue these Ladies eyes, and thei bestowe them so cunningly, that makyng out their choyce on the Idelest, thei alwaies become conquerers. No Nouice maie scape their handes, but from Heauen with Prometheus he bringes away some flame: So that in the Prin∣ces Court (I dare auowe) there are more at this instaunt ina∣moured, then of continent habitude. Madamisella her self what practiseth she not, this youth must bee her seruaunt and weare her colours, that Gentleman her Partner and weare her sleeue, a third her Louer and pos∣sesse vnchast bed pleasures: And though the two first bee as la∣uishe in their giftes as the last, yet thei both are forst to hold the Candle, while the other offers to our Ladie. Suche bee these Gentlewomen, that thei haue tongues to traine, eyes to alure, bodies to performe: no opertunitie with them shall be let slippe for a pleasure: nothing pretermitted to make themselues finish. In their youthly beauties, thei procure many fauourers, who led by colours not substaunce, thinkes that the olde pain∣ted face of Proserpina, is the same it was when she first became Plutos wife. Thei haue colours to be rubie tallowe faces, me∣dicine to allaie grose humours, Maskes to couer deformed vi∣sages,
Periwigges to countenaunce their black bushes, strong buskes to straighten crooked bodies, greate Ruffes to abate their fulsome cheekes, small Rusfes to seeme bigge their pre∣tie faces, Frenche Vardingalles to set out and bolster their bummes, high Pantoffles to make them to seeme tall, loose Gaberdines to shadowe their wrong shapen bodies, straight Gownes to set forth their proper proportions: Yea, such sweet soules bee these, as neither fashion shall faile them that thei fa∣uour, nor pleasure vnsought for that maie delight them. These makes our youthes to bee dissolute, not studious: a∣morous, not venterous: wanton, not wise: curious, not cōstant. In so muche that you maie see here as muche ryot, as in Rome suspected Religion. This is the demeanure of the Court of Naples, this haue I seene and learned by myne owne experience. And for this Si∣monides, as thou saiest thou art come to Naples, if to eschewe by seeyng, and not to practise by beholding, I thinke no man bet∣ter welcome then my Countrey man, but if to followe that whiche I haue past ouer with repentaunce, no man soner wisht from hence thence Simonides. Lucius Malius a formall Painter, yet hauyng deformed sonnes, was partly touched at a Supper by a freend of his in this maner. Malius, thou paintest well, but fashionest ill, to whom the Painter aunswered thus. Sir, I beget and fashion children in the night, and neuer paint but by daie. As it fared with Malius in paintyng, so it falleth out with aduised men in their actions, for what thei enterprise, is nar∣rowly examined before it be put in proofe: yet what so by them is formed in silent, that is past their heades vnawares, these as framed in the darke, thei marre in the fashion: but what expe∣rience perswades thee too, paint that by daie, as a sweete im∣pression in the soule: If ought sodainly ouerstippe thee by er∣rour, count it a bastard thought and refuse it, it came not of thy reason. Whatsoeuer is here to be seene in Court, I haue tolde in worde, and if thou doubt of it, or that my reportes faile me, I will breefly shewe you in deed. A more conuenient trauaile for
you (in my conceipt Countrey man) were this, to goe to A∣thens, where in studiyng you maie confirme your experience with readyng, acquaint your self with learned Writers the fa∣thers of the worlde, and delight your self with heauenly con∣templation whiche beseemeth your person. In Athens you shall finde Weapons to subdue vice, raines to keepe in reason, yea, in Athens thou shalt reade the good perswasions of Demostines, the eloquence of Tully: there maist thou meete, if for feature, with comely: if for knowledge, with learned: if for good counsaile, with the hoare hedded. And amongst the whole cataloge of comely schollers, there shalt thou meete with a Gentleman of such experience, as may confirme thee in thy trauaile, counsaile thee in thy Loue, com∣mend thee into straunge Countreis, comfort thee in all thy sor∣rowes, teache thee how thou oughtest to walke, yea, with so sweet a tongued Orator shalt thou meete, as Aeschiues should be skoft at if he discommended hym, and Anthony the Orator derided at if he did imitate hym. All these perfections there, shalt thou finde in one man, who as the Bee sucketh Honey findeth vertue, as the Camelion fee∣deth on the Ayre followeth contemplation, who can Court it with the best, and Scholler it with the most, in whom I know not whether I should more commende his maners or his lear∣nyng, the one is so exquisite, the other so generall. Happy shalt thou be in thy trauaile to meete with this Euphues, who is cu∣rious in describyng the Anotomie of wit, and constaunt in re∣prehendyng vanities in Loue. Hym seeke thou out in Athens, for Athens is renowned by hym, with whose acquaintaunce thou shalt returne to Ciuill so well counsailed, as that Clarinda shall either sue to bee partaker of thy perfections, or thou alo∣wyng a continent life, desist from thy follies. Thus hast thou heard my cautions against Loue, the custo∣mes of this Court, my counsaile in thy trauaile, and the com∣mendatiō of a noble Gentleman whom I would acquaint thée with, to whom I will not onely commende thee by Lers, but also with earnest intreaty desire hym to entertai thee as my Countrey man and a courteous straung
Thou seest well what my will is and what thy wishe should be, what thy wantes are, and how to amend thy wreake, I praie thee as thankfully esteeme of my counsailes, as I do willingly bestowe them on thee my Countrey man: whiche since thei be the fruites of my experience, I wishe them to preuaile effec∣tually with thee. As this holy Frier was thus discoursing with our Simoni∣des, the reporte came that the Ʋiceroy hymself with his whole traine, would at that very instaunt, visite the Reliques of the Carthusians: wherevpon Fredericke de Cicuta, takyng Simoni∣des by the hande, conuaied him into the Churche, where conue∣niently he might beholde the maiestie of the Regent, and the royaltie of the Courtiers: and accordyng to his expectation, eche thyng fell out, so that our Spanyard was glutted with sho∣wes, bothe of manly seemelinesse, and womanly comelinesse. The Euensong beeyng finished, he was driuen out of his dumpes with the returne of our religious Votiue, who que∣stioning with Simonides, how he alowed of the brauerie of Na∣ples, was satisfied with this aunswere. Truely Don Fredericke, I see here the report and the thing it self aunswerable in them selues: Notwithstandyng, I ac∣compt with you all these but painted Sepulchers: whose bo∣dies, though clad with brauerie, yet are their inwarde disposi∣tions stored with vices: and euen at this instaunt, I was be∣thinkyng my self of Athens. Here the Frier interruptyng hym, saied thus. Continue that opinion Simonides, for it is verteous, I will further thee in this, and furnish thee with Shippyng. Where∣vpon, conueying Simonides towardes his Lodgyng, at the Key he incountered with an Athenian Scholler called Perian∣der, of whom learning out that a Shippe was readie to depart with the next Winde, he saied to Simonides. Loe Countrey man, all opertunities blesse thee with good fortune, and the Floodes seeme to fauour thy proceedynges. Wherefore, let vs to thy Lodgyng where thou maiest repose thy self, and I wil presently to my pen to dispatch my Letters. Whervpon, agreeing with the Maister for Simonides passage,
and vesiryng hym to call for hym, when winde and tyde might serue, thei went bothe to Simonides Lodgyng: and hauyng first serued their appetites, Simonides betooke himself to sleepe, but Frier Fredericke to his pen, salutyng Euphues in this sorte. The Letter of Fredericke to Euphues. ON that very 16. of Aprill, on whiche the Priestes of the mother of the Gods, with mournefull howlynges (presagyng some ill fortune) began to weepe, on that very day Fredericke de Cicuta, sendeth Gree∣tyng, and wisheth good successe to Eu∣phues of Athens: The reporte runneth here in Naples, that your Grecian eloquence is sauced with a little suspition of flatterie, whiche makes me to vse plainesse in reporte, least in eloquence I might borrowe a little of your er∣rour. Our affaires here (for I know you looke for newes) is af∣ter the olde state, our Court is amorous as it was, and the state as Peace able as it should be, so that if olde newes be newes, I haue sent you some newes: yet if nouelties be the newes that you looke for, I haue bothe nouelties to acquaint you with, and a newe freend to present you with. Don Fredericke the Courtier, is become Frier Fredericke the Carthusian, hauyng left of his Courtly costlinesse, he hath bound hymself to a Re∣ligious habite, and as a man bothe altered in habite and beha∣uiour, so is he chaunged bothe in stile and studie, yet wishyng thee the fauour of the heauens in extremitie, and the gracious aspect of the Muses in thy studies. There came of late into these quarters, a Gentleman of my Countrey, who hath left his Natiue soyle for Loue, and tried suche like path waies as once did Euphues of Athens, hym in these Letters I commend vnto thee, whom if thou wisely looke into, thou shalt finde hym like to the Willow, the more thou subduest his affections by reason, the better will he grow to the attainement of wise∣dome,
and whom if thou counsaile accordyng to thy know∣ledge, he shal not onely learne by thy liuing to auoyd the fire, but also recarrie into Ciulll, a certaine testimonie of thy Athe∣nian wisedome, him counsaile according as he erreth, so maist thou confirme thy self, and in seeyng hym tread awry, bothe vnderlay thyne owne vnleueled phantasies, and teache hym how to bridle his. If in like curtesies I may satisfie thee in Na∣ples, vse me: meane while, I commit thee to the benefite of good fortune, my frend to thy tuitiō, & my self to my prayers, desiryng the powers to make thy actions as prosperous, as my Orisons shall be feruent. From Naples 16. Calendes Aprilis. Yours assured, Fredericke de Cicuta. No soner had the Frier ended his Letters, but that the Mai∣ster gaue warnyng that Winde ond Tyde serued to set for∣warde to Athens. Wherevpon he awakyng Simonides, with these tearmes tooke his last Ʋale of hym. Countrey man, since the opertunitie of your trauaile cal∣leth you awaie, and now (as it should seeme) I am to commit you to the mercie of the Flood, and to the curteous entertaine∣ment of my freend Euphues, I am thus muche to entreate you in my name to salute hym and deliuer hym these Letters: And for that acquaintaunce hath falne betweene vs by suche good fortune, let not (good Simonides) but that I maie heare from thee by Letters, and for euery line, I will returne twaine, with a thousande thankes besides. Simonides regardyng the gracious behauiour of his Religi∣ous Countrey man, aunswered thus. Although heretofore, the furie of the Waues hath hin such, as I partly vowed no more to trust it, yet led by the benefite of good fortune and your counsaile, I will once againe venture my carcasse on the mercilesse Floodes, and if Fortune alot me happie ariuall at Athens, I will not onely performe what you haue giuen me in charge, but also thinke my self happie, that my rude lines shall be requited with suche fatherly counsailes.
With these and suche like talke pacyng to the Key, they bothe in freendly maner gaue the other a curteous farewell. ¶ How Simonides beyng on the Sea be∣tweene Naples and Athens, was entertai∣ned with a very pleasaunt discourse by one of the Passengers. SIMONIDES seekyng out a Cabben in the Shippe, after he had giuen Frier Fredericke his last farewell by waggyng his hande, the other beyng on the Shore, their Ankers wayed, and the Southwest winde blowing vp a pleasaunt Gale, with merrie cheare, the Marriners tosse the Cannes. Simonides with diuers other Passengers, settyng them selues close togethers, wished them selues at the ende of their Voyage, before thei had in maner begunne their passage: Amongst the rest a merie companion, willing to passe the time with pleasure, began to cheare his Compheres thus. Currage my freendes, methinkes our delightes are not aunswerable to the clerenesse of the Weather, what doe we droupe? Let vs either with pleasaunt discourse beguile the te∣diousnesse of our Passage, or els the Welkin maie ouer cast and lower, to see vs all so sowerly disposed. Simonides replied, and surely sir you saie sooth, me thinkes eche of our handes is on our halfpeney, we are not frolike, and where in disposition we be sullen in our selues, there maie lit∣tle mirthe passe from vs, but if it please you to make your dis∣course aunswerable to your pleasaunt humour, you shall no doubt make of all vs malancholie folkes, to become merrie Greekes. And is it so said Corubus (for so the Gentleman was named) then your worde shall stande, and if it shall please you to heare a pretie discourse that is as true as it is pleasaunt, giue eare for now I begin my tale.
In the Citie of Scienna (a pleasaunt & commodious towne, renowned aswell for the brauerie of the noble, as the wealth of the Marchaunt, and stored with greate foyson of beautifull Damosels) there dwelt a sixe yeares agoe an honourable and renowned Magnifico called Sertorius, who hauyng large summes of money in most of our bankes of Jtaly; growne at last to the greatest estimation in the Citie, and blest euery waie with the best supplies of fortune, was onely depriued of this comfort, that he was wiuelesse: to the remedie whereof, he en∣deuoured to cast his eyes abroade, mindyng to fixe his fansie on some faire yong damosell, by whose companie in his declining yeares, he might perhappes be beautified with issue and heires to possesse his inheritaunce. At the last by long trauell, hauyng attained the sight of a delicate yong Maiden, by birthe noble, and of passyng beautie, one of the Daughters of the Signiors of the Citie called Brunellus, the Virgines name Orienta, he sought by all meanes possible, how he might best imploye hym self to the attainement of his purpose. In the ende, he solicited the Father, questioned with the Mother, visited the Daughter, he cloathed hymself in vnaccustomed colours, maquisityng his Munchches to looke youthly, stretchyng out his starke limmes almost wrethen with age after the fashion of a Monar∣ko: so that without all peraduentures, he perswaded hymself he should speede he was so frolike. Wherevpon (after the Italian guise) he concluded with the father and freends, who more alo∣wing of his wealth then of his goodly personage, thei brought hym in the ende to the speeche of the Daughter. She beyng yong, tender, faire, amiable, and full of all gra∣ces, and seeyng her self sued too by suche an olde crust, began e∣uen with a smilyng regarde to pretende what was to followe, and beyng curteously saluted by Sertorius, she returned hym a requitall. Wherevpon the olde Magnifico began to woe thus. Mistris Orienta, that sweete beautie of yours, whiche is a∣ble to subdue the most indurat affection of the wisest, and con∣quer the greatest resist of the strongest, hath made me your pri∣soner, not otherwise able to be deliuered frō the martirdome of Loue, but onely by the possession of your fauour, wherevppon
my poore harte feedeth all his sweetest contemplation. And though my yeares perhappes maie make breach betwene your tender delicacie and m forworne age, yet perswade your self thus, that although I am not the onely to be liked, yet knowe I throughly, I haue not in me vtterly to be loathed, what eue∣ry yeare shall diswade in myne age, I can recompence it with a caske of Crownes: and for wealth, Italy shall not afforde you a better housband, though for youth it maie alowe you more to be accompted of. This writhen bodie (sweete Damosell) maie perhappes afforde you as muche honest pleasure, as one more nice: other supplies muche more and farre better. Wherefore gētle Orienta vouchsafe me fauour: for if you shoul once mar∣tir me with repulse (alas the while) my life would proue but death, and my happie and blessed daies should be determined. The yong Gentlewoman, hauyng heard her lustie Woers suite, replied thus. Me thinkes Signior Sertorius, your yeares beyng almoste growne to their date, you should not be giuen to doate, and the heires of experience beautifiyng your head, you should with good aduertisement call your self home. To shape an Oxe and an Asse in one Plough, were but a mockerie: to place hot and colde in one consert, were as great follie: to ioyne age and youth in vowed Wedlocke, were very noysome: how can there be agreement, where all thynges are contrary: or loue, where the parties be lothsome. Twere better to be buried honestly chast, then to be a Bride in an olde mans bed. One of your feete Signior Sertorius, is in the graue, the other declinyngly bendyng, can not brooke long to vpholde so croo∣ked a corse. I in my prime of youth, natiue heate, cheefe beautie, like to maintaine combat against the fates a long tyme. You if perhappes (as I doubt me) you speede of that you speake for, when your small heate is satisfied, will tipe vp your heeles, and leaue poore Orienta, a sorrowfull Widowe, and ha∣uing mourned a little for maners sake, findyng my self vncom∣bered from suche a loathsome burthen, might disporte my self
at my pleasure, and make my self blessed in my newe choyce. Noble Magnifico, thinke you of your Beades, not of your bed: of your Mattins, not of your Marriage: It is now tyme to finishe your accompt of pleasure, since your principall per∣formaunce is extinguished. As for me, let me alone sillie maide as I am, there be more fitter in Scienna for you to wed then my self, and more meeter for me to match then with you. Thus desiring Signior Sertorius to beare with Orientas rude∣nesse, she takes her leaue mynded to followe her businesse. This olde amorous Gentleman, hauyng bin galled so nere∣ly, as scarce he could bridle his choler, yet yeeldyng to the re∣pulse for the present, not doubtyng but in tyme the humour would ouerpasse, and that by her freendes perswasion, his Mi∣stris would bee pacified. This notwithstandyng, he continued his wonted porte, feastyng the Father, flatteryng the Mother, presentyng the Daughter, who delighted not in suche stale youthes, so that opertunitie (or the importunitie of the fates) serued, that to frustrate his enterprise, Loue began to wring the harte of a yong Gentleman, one of the same Citie, who fin∣dyng his passion no otherwise recurable, but by the fauour of Orienta, practised in what he might to compasse his purpose, towarde the attainement of her good grace, in so muche, that as occasions were proffered, if Orienta would be holy, Fuluius would goe to Churche: if disposed to walke for recreation, her suppliaunt must take the ayre. Thus presentyng fire to the flaxe, the vncurable heate of the torment inflamed the yeeldyng affectes of the yong Damosell to receiue the impression, that being bothe touched with equall desire, the yong man perplexed by reason of the matche the fa∣ther pretended with Sertorius, she holding backe by maidenlike shamefastnesse, because she was vnproffered, and bothe of them otherwise deteined then thei wisht for. The noble courage of the yong Gentleman, led by a smilyng hope of heauenly re∣warde for a small aduenture, compassyng in his cogitations many matters: At last he be thought hymself of his acquain∣taunce with Sertorius, whose wanton woyng was knowne ve∣ry well through all Scienna, by hym onely in his mynd, he con∣cluded
the attainement of his purpose, though in deed his one∣ly enemie in this attempt. Fuluius hauyng sought hym out, with subtill information, he saluted hym thus. Signior Sertorius, the olde familiaritie betweene my father and you, and the report of your curteous and honest dealynges in Scienna, hath made me (being forced thereunto by necessitie) to come and craue your fauour. Thus it is, that beyng greatly indebted in Scienna, by rea∣son of continuall suites betweene the House of the Coruasij and me, for a certaine Castle betweene this and Aranthum, I am forced now by the Iudiciall decree, to buye their parte, and to this issue altogether vnfurnished of money, I am to sell or mor∣gage certaine Reuenues, to the accomplishing of my purpose. Wherevpon (good Signior) if either vpon morgage or sale, it please you to furnishe me with one thousande Duckettes, I shall by this meanes, not onely be greatly bounde vnto you for your fauour, but also if in any seruice I maie stande in stead, prest at your commaunde. The old Foxe though his lippes did water, dissembling to loue no Grapes, aunswered Fuluius thus. Good Fuluius, the nobilitie of the House you come of, the faithfull freendship betweene your father and me, with the to∣ward and honourable behauiour of your self, were sufficient to inforce a straunger, muche more a freend to pleasure you. But when I looke into my present estate, and see the occasions I haue to imploye my money, truely I am loth to set foote in the cause: notwithstandyng, to pleasure so honest a Gentleman as you, if you be mynded to sell any Signorie, I will straine my self you shal haue money, Fuluius shal finde a frend of Sertorius. The Gentleman seemyng very desirous, gaue our Magni∣fico hartie thankes, assuryng hym that to the aduenture of his life, he would requite the fauour shewed him. Herevpon he ma∣kes price of a most pleasaunt and beautifull Maner house with the demeanes, situate out of Scienna fiue or sixe Leagues, the bargaine is beaten out and accordingly agreed vpon, that Ser∣torius shall haue the Fee simple of the Signorie of Brentio,
Fuluius for his title twelue thousand Crownes, and for that li∣uerie and season was requisit the daie is now to bee prefixed to performe it. At this tyme Sertorius bethinkyng hymself of Brunellus with his faire Orienta, began to say thus in his owne imagination. Oh happie bargaine for me, this is a passyng present for my Orienta, I doubt not but if giftes will please the Goddes, re∣wardes maie entice women: And on this he concluded in hym self to delaie the liuerie and season for one moneth, at whiche tyme, he besought Fuluius to make honourable preparation for hym and his companie: addyng this moreouer, that the onely Gemme he desired in the world, should be there at the banquet. Fuluius perceiuyng how the game would goe, promised to performe what he required, and beyng assured by Sertorius to receiue his readie money he departed, and labouryng by sun∣drie meanes to come to the speech of Orienta, he fel in acquain∣taunce with an olde Gentlewoman, who had often recourse to the house of Brunellus, and priuie familiaritie with Orienta, to whom Fuluius opened the bitter assaultes of his passion, and betwéene faire speeches and liberall rewardes he so compassed this woman, that she promised not onely to preferre his suite, but also to applie what perswasion she thought necessarie, to∣warde the attainement of the Maidens fauour. Breefly it was thus concluded, that Fuluius should wright and Espraunce would deliuer, who taking pen he thus opened his passion. The Letter of Fuluius to faire Orienta. IT must needes bee some deuine furie, not yearthly folly (sweet Mistries) that maketh a mortall crea∣ture constauntly to loue, and vnmouably to perse∣uer, and heauenly must that subiect be, that by one onely radiant aspect, can knit two soules in one, and make vncertaine dust and ashes, pertaker of the constauncie of
the Goddes. If they led by a sacred custome swearyng by Stix er∣reuocably punishe, the Louer enchained by affection wil vndoub∣tedly perseuer. Wherevpon (sweet Orienta) hauyng been in this one benefite, made pertaker with the Goddes in constauncie, by one onely aspect of your beautie, I am now (beyng altogether en∣clined to heauenly pleasures) to beseech you to empleat more plea∣sure, to the ende, poore Fuluius maie bee more constaunt, J sawe thy beautie (sweete Mistris) and seeyng it wondered, and won∣deryng, am enforced to woe, that either J maie by your meanes be blessed with the possession of your beautifull fauour, or be bereft of myne eye sight least I see to my confusion, Madamisella, I beseech thee by the sweete beautie of thy lockes, by the amorous delicacie of thyne eyes, by the power attractiue of thy celestiall beautie, to ease his harmes who onely restes thy poore tormented. Fuluius. This Letter sealed vp, Esperaunce, accordyng to her name, so appliyng her nature, putting Fuluius in good hope of the be∣nefite of good fortune, pretermitted no tyme, but with conue∣niencie opened his affection to Orienta in these tearmes. My good Mistris, the greate and passionate affection of my freend, his humble and incessaunt suite, haue made me encline to pitie, and to take in hande to present you the submission of a most louyng Gentleman, and although it maie be thought by you, that this office is vncomely for my yeares, yet assure you this, that where in chast loue you are sude vnto, and by a noble Gentleman, I dare auowe the action is not discommendable. And with this, takyng Fuluius Letters in her handes, she de∣liuered them to her, desiryng her to be fauourable in the cause, and to regarde the Gentlemans humble suite. Orienta blushyng with bashfull rednesse replied thus. Good Esperaunce, the honest opinion I conceiue of your staiednesse, confirmeth me now in that, whiche otherwise no modest mayd durst once to attēpt: but since it can not infect to reade, & to an vnreasonable request I haue a tongue to denay, I will be bold to ouer reade his question, and for your sake shape hym an aun∣swere. Wherevpon, openyng the Letters, and ouer readyng
them againe and againe, the olde embers vnraked discouered quicke coales, and the fire sent out the flame with a scaldyng sigh, wherevpon, after a little pause she bespake her thus. Esperaunce, if these faire promises made by Fuluius, will be aunswered with the perfection of his person, if as he writeth well he will doe well, perhappes I knowe a freend as good as my self maie either preferre hym, or so nere kinsfolke shall fall out, as none but death can disseuer. Tut sweete harte (saied Esperaunce) doubt not of the Gen∣tlemans honour, I knowe him well, and sticke not to accompt of his courteous demaunde, when he desires not to straine you to the breache of your honour. And if it bee so (saied Orienta) then in the steade of his writ∣ten Letters, deliuer hym this token of my honourable fauour, that he maie see I esteeme his suite. And that (if he be so affec∣tionate as he seemeth) he maie in person preferre his cause to¦morow in the euenyng, for that his Mistris this next daie, must be at Signior Sinatos Weddyng, as a bidden guest, where if he want no will to atchiue, he may finde season both to speake and speede, and so commende me to hym. Esperaunce, with her aunswere at tongues ende, quickly en∣counters with Fuluius, who honourably rewardyng her ende∣uour, wonderfully reioyced in his happie and good fortune, and bethinking with himself how with least suspition he might visite his Mistris, he concluded on a Maske. Wherevpon, cal∣lyng a sorte of his courteous Companions together, it was a∣greed thei would make the Bridegrome priuie to their com∣myng, who accepting of their curtesie in most freendly maner, promised them a hartie welcome. All thynges prepared for this purpose, the next daie came Orienta with her father and mother to the solemnising of this Weddyng. Our snudge Magnifico, is there in his best colours to court it: Night beyng come, the Maskers beyng mounted on great Horses, apparelled after the Turkie fashion all in cloath of Tissue entered the greate Court, where dismountyng them selues, thei orderly marched into the great Chamber, the com∣pany
attentiuely beholding the brauerie of the Maskers, Ful∣uius had giuen his compartners a lesson, whereby Orienta was left for his owne choyce, whom softly taking by the hande, and with a coye regarde, she seemed at the first to straine curtesie, but easely perswaded to that she most desired: after thei had pa∣ced the first measure, eche Masker fallyng to the courtyng of his Ladie, Fuluius began his discourse in this sorte. The occasion (sweete Mistris) that you alowed me, is euen now happely atchiued, and he that was bolde to sue in paper, is now here readie to performe in person, here is your loyall sworne seruaunt Fuluius, who without your gracious aspect, must finishe his life with vnmercifull martirdome. Here interrupted by the Musitions, and hauyng traced on neatly the other Corranto, Orienta aunswered. I am not so iniurious Signior Fuluius, but I will adde one benefite to hym that preferreth all occasions: and if in chast loue, so good a Gentleman as you hath vowed your seruice, it maie be his chaunce to finde as constaunt a freend to yeeld him his rewarde. Here interrupted againe, at the third pause Fuluius spake thus. For benefites that shall passe from Beautie, Fuluius will be thankfull, and if it shall please Orienta, to fit all occasions so well as she framed this, Fuluius shall no doubt finde a remedie, and his Mistris shall not repent her. Here the instaunt that interrupted the Louer, shortly serued the Ladie, who discoursed thus. My sweete freend, if the Mistris of thy harte, will be per∣swaded by my meanes, feare not, but ere long she will make ei∣ther time serue affection, or both satisfie thy expectatiō. Wher∣vpon, desiring hym to be circumspect, for feare of suspition (for the Magnificoes eyes were watchfull ouer her) the Gentle∣man refrained vntill the Maske being ended, and eche Gentle∣man accompanied with his Mistris went to banquet, he choo∣sing a conuenient corner to discouer himself to Orienta, in these tearmes perswaded with her. Since the equall powers haue vouchsafed an vnitie betwene
our affections (good Mistris) I praie you let neither circum∣spection bee wantyng to auoyde daunger, nor preuention bee sought for to disburden vs of all hinderaunce. All Scienna can well reporte of the loue Sertorius beareth you, of the importunate suites wherewith he soliciteth earnest∣ly your father and you, and it may be for his exceeding wealth, he maie wipe the fatt from my fingers, vnlesse pollicie preuent that whiche iniurious resist hath proffered: so that now (good Mistris) you must stande to your tacklyng, or els the Market is like to be marde. And lieth it in me sweete freend (said Orienta) to performe, truely then giue me instructions, and I wil quickly haue them without booke. Then gracious Orienta (saied Fuluius) thus it standeth, I seeyng no meanes to attaine the discouery of myne affections towardes you, of late colourably went and compassed with the olde Magnifico your Woer, to sell a peece of Lande, by that meanes thinkyng to wring out somewhat, by growyng in fa∣miliaritie with hym, but the Foxe beyng wylie, set me beside the Coshin, yet greedily gapyng after my Reuenues, was con∣tented to imploye twelue thousand Crownes for a Manner of myne liyng sixe Leagues from out this Citie, desiryng me to make honourable prouision for his comming that day moneth, for that the sweetest Gemme in the worlde should be there with hym. I smellyng out his drift, breefly concluded on it, and by good fortune meetyng with courteous Esperaunce, by whom this good happe hath been furnished, now hauyng taken coun∣saile of my seuen nightes pillow, if it shall please Orienta, Ful∣uius at that season shall be her maried pheare, and perhappes, make the Magnifico bestowe a good childes parte on Orienta. The quicke wit of the yong Maiden, conceiuing at the first the conueiaunce of all, smilyngly thus interrupted hym. Fuluius, I must take your tale before it fall, I smell out the drift of your pretence, to the furtheryng of whiche, Sertorius shall neither want faire promises, nor sweete regardes: be thou as carefull in the rest as I wil be in this, and the Gole is wun, the maisterie is our owne.
Thus giuyng hym a gentle Basele bouche, thei thrust them selues amongst the companie, where Orienta, to call away sus∣pition, saied thus. I had thought (Gentleman) that so many and sundrie in∣treaties, might haue been sufficient to haue made you disco∣uer, but since I see you are so resolute, you will admit no per∣swasion, though you denaie vs the benefite of that, yet vouch∣safe vs the curtesie in this, that though you eate none of our Iunkettes, yet it will please you keepe some in store for your freendes. It maie be (replied Fuluius) my humours be such now (faire Damosell) that if I should discouer, I might barr my self of a supposed benefite, but for these delicates, I had rather thei should lye vneaten, thē my fancie want to prosecute an occasiō. Why sir (said she) looke about you, perhappes euen amongst these Iunkettes, there will be founde somewhat to feede your humour. For Comfectes Mistris (replied Fuluius) some bee costiue, and that fittes not my complexion: some comfortable to the stomacke, where I desire quiet in mynde: all formde to please the sence, where I desire medicine to confirme the soule. So that seeyng there seemes no equalitie, neither in their opera∣tion, neither in my imagination, I thinke it better to let them lye for those that list, for thei fit not the humour of them that Loue. In these discoursinges the night ouer past, and the tyme drewe on that the Bride would to bed, their Maske therefore now readie to departe, Orienta, breefly tooke her leaue in this sorte. Bee thou as carefull as thy freend will be constaunt, and as faithfull, as she will be firme, and no doubt but good fortune in thyne owne house shall present thee with the greatest pleasure thou desirest, and so till then farewell. Fuluius satisfied with these sweete words, straining her soft∣ly by the finger saied thus. I beseeche the iust heauens, so to further my proceedynges, as I am fed with thy delicacie, and so to hasten on the accom∣plishment
of thy desires, that Fuluius maie enioye that sweete, for whiche this long tyme he hath tasted many sowers. This saied, with his companie he marched awaie, leauyng Orienta deuising on the constauncie of her seruaunt, and Ful∣uius admiryng at the beautie of his Mistris. The Mariage thus finished, Brunellus with his faire daugh∣ter accompanied with Sertorius drewe homewarde, and in the waie, who takes occasion to court it but our Magnifico. Mistris Orienta (saies he) how like you these sportes that are past, were thei not pleasaunt. Truely Signior (replied she) I neuer sawe better sporte, nor any pleasure that more deligh∣ted me. And I Madame (saied he) neuer receiued lesse conten∣tation. And why so ({quod} Orienta) alas my sweete (aunswered he) your repulse hath so ouergrowne my harte with sorowes, as vnlesse your grace, my greefes must rest vncurable. Well well (saied Orienta) it maie be if your fit holde till to morowe, I will stand so muche your freend as to be speake you an Asculapius, to lenifie your Feuer. Sertorius reuiued with her sweete wordes, giuyng her har∣tie thankes for her cordiall comforte, for that night tooke his leaue, deuising highly vpon the fauour, his Goddes had so gra∣ciously graunted hym, and on the morowe beyng readie to de∣part his house, Fuluius myndful of his businesse, came to know his resolution touchyng the former bargaine, Sertorius trium∣phyng before the victorie, made Fuluius priuie to all his pre∣tence, and in respect that he thought himself assured of Orienta for his wife, he was contented to bestow that Patrimonie that then he was to take possession of, vpon her, franckly and freely as a testimonie of his loue, desiryng Fuluius the rather, with as muche honour as he might to receiue bothe hymself and his re∣tinue, not doubtyng but in the ende throughly to recompence suche fauour as he could or would bestowe. Fuluius feedyng hym with faire wordes, tooke his leaue, compactyng with a Priest to be in readinesse, for the better ac∣complishing of his purpose, sparing no cost for all the dainties that might bee gotten, and what Sertorius wisht for the recei∣uyng of hym and his companie royally, Fuluius employed to
the solemnising of his Mariage secretly. He busie about his af∣faires, our Magnifico resorted to his Mistris, whom findyng at her mornyng Mattins, as pliable as at her Euensong she was gracious, he attempted her thus. This onely suppose of your experience to subdue my passi∣on (sweet Orienta) hath made this nightes sleepe more plea∣saunt then it would haue ben: and this mornyng so solitarie as I know I should haue found it, so that comforted by your faire promise I desire to bee confirmed in your fauour, and that no let nor hinderaunce may intercept our proceedynges, if you make stay for dower, thinkyng me more in loue with your co∣fers then with your beautie, to ease you of that doubt, if it please you to take the aire for a daie or two in your fathes com∣pany, you shall see by euident proofe what prouiso I haue pre∣pared for the matter: if for any thing els, that my silly vnder∣standyng can not conceiue, the least rebuke you can vse should make a mendes, for Sertorius will onely bee addect to doe you seruice. The courtious damosell smilyng at the vnnecessarie kynd∣nesse of this old libidious doterell, knowyng well how to be∣stow all colours, drue exquisitly out this counterfite. As the Marble is at last with many droppes made to yeeld, the Iron by many fiers is made fluxible, the Tigresse by mans industrie made gentle, so my tender harte wone by the euident tokens of your goodwill beginns now to discouer those con∣ceiptes, whiche willyngly I would haue kept close and in silent. Those straung regardes I haue bestowed on you Signior Sertorius) was not in disdaine, of your person but in tryall of your loialtie, if at your firste repulse you had giuen ouer, I should by that meanes haue founde your lacke of loue, where now perseueryng in your constauncy, I followe you, in breefe, Orienta is at your commaund in sauegard of her honour, to accompany you where you please, and in honost Matrimonie, will be willyng to fulfill your desires. The old Gentleman, findyng all thynges to sort out so currantly on his side, runes to the Father, imbraceth the Mo∣ther,
prasing their daughters wisdome, gloriyng in her fauour and disiryng altogither, to acompanie him to see a purchace that he hath made, promising Brunellus, his daughters paines should not bee ill imploid. The day long desired by Fuluius, and as often wisht for by Orienta is come, our Magnifico with his supposed Father and Mother in law with his sweet Mistris are mounted, and aprochyng nere to Fuluius Castell (who attended their com∣ming) he thus entertained Signiori and mes Dames, you are al hartely welcome, you Singnior Sertoruis, to receiue the posses∣sion of your owne, these to be pertakers of such pleasures as at this instant I can aquaint them withall, as the person whom I most honour in Scienna, wherefore if it shal please you to en∣ter, you shall trie that in deed whiche I report in promise. Thei yelding him very courtious thankes, but especially O∣rienta zelously honouring his humanitie, with soft speeches vt∣tered these wordes. The powers I thinke in thy affabilitie, hath concluded such force, as maugre all effectes the brauest must bowe: this saied, thei altogether entered. It were in vaine to recount the bountie of their repast, the seemelinesse of their Lodgynges, the varietie of their pleasures, for these would but set Seafa∣ryng mens lippes on water, let vs but looke into the successe to make vs merrie. Truely Gentleman so it was, that the first night ouer past, Sertorius willyng to conclude what he had in mynde, accom∣panied with Brunellus his wife and daughter, began thus to breake with them. In respect of the bountie of your sweete Daughter (good Brunellus) who settyng aside all nicetie and coynesse, hath at the last vouchsafed me her fauour, to the ende I maie in some∣thyng make euident my zealous good will, I will at this in∣staunt, franckly and freely imparte that vnto her, which by the payment of twelue thousand Crownes I am to enioye: then callyng vnto hym a Notarie, whom for that purpose he had brought thether with hym, he made a faithfull conueiaunce to Orienta, of the whole Purchace, in as full title and proportion,
as he bought it of Fuluius, and in presence paiyng the readie money, he caused the liuerie and season, with all coueyauntes, conueiaunces, specialities what so euer (in the presence of the whole companie) to be deliuered to Orienta, who bashfully re∣ceiuyng them, spake thus to Sertorius. I doe not bestow my fancie for peney fauour (liberall Mag∣nifico) but for loue, neither meane I by giftes to be tied to in∣conuenience, it maie therefore please you with my fauour to receiue them againe as my gift, for what in loue shal passe from me, shall be bound to no conditions. Sertorius altogither inflamed with her courtious and wise demeanour, began to protest before the assemblie, that without respect of any thing what so euer he bestowed the benifite, who vouchsafed very well, to imploye so small a purchace on her, who was the onely continuer of his decaiyng life. The freendes of Orienta seyng his noble and liberall affec∣tion thanked him highly, eche one praised his bountie, but espe∣cially Fuluius whom it best behoued, who seyng now that all o∣pertunities did hasten on his happinesse, all that daie plied his guestes with bountifull cheare and store of good wines. Night drawyng on, thei were by their retinue conuaied to their Lod∣gynges, Orienta, desirous to see the issue of her delightes, and beyng altogether impacient of delaies, whisperyng Fuluius in his eare she spake thus. Oh Fuluius, the fates alowing thee all thynges as thou list, why loyterest thou, is thy hot loue so sodainly cooled, Oh make an ende of the Comedie begun, and let our fastynges be fini∣shed with a happie Weddyng. Content your self my deare (said Fuluius) for this night Hi∣meneus shall daunce at our Weddyng. Your fathrs Chamber (where you lye) hath in the corner extendyng to the East, a Trappe doore, by the whiche when your father sleapeth sound∣ly, if it please you to conuaie your selfe, I and my friends wil attend you, to finishe vp the long desired pleasure: they bothe beeyng thus priuie to eche other intent, and replenished with mutuall ioyes, tooke their leaue, he to keepe sentinell, she to watch opertunitie, the companie and season both serued, and Fuluius attendyng with some of his honourable frendes for the
commyng of Orienta: at last with great ioye, in the presence of sundrie Gentlemen, thei solemnised the Nuptialles, and ha∣uyng a long tyme feasted them selues, at last thei were con∣ueied to their bed pleasures, our Magnifico snortyng verie soundly, our Brunellus and his wife sleepyng as profoundly, little suspectyng what had passed, till on the morowe Brunellus wakyng, and findyng his Daughter conueied awaie, with o∣pen exclamations bothe he and his wife ranne vpon Sertorius, buffetyng the olde foole on the face, who wonderyng at their outrage, beseeched them to be more wise then thei seemed, who for his good will, had not deserued suche a requitaunce, but Brunellus ouercome with choler, fell thus a rayling. Thou olde Palliard, it is neither thy painted speeches shall diswade, nor thy faire gloses maie deminishe the furie of myne yre, who like a subtil wetch, hast rauished me of my onely plea∣sure, and brought me hether to the abandonyng of myne owne Daughter, is this the loue that with solemne vowes and open protestations thou wast wont to make, is this thy loiall freend∣ship, be these the fruites of thy liberalitie. O that I had buried my poore Orienta, or preserued her from a Lecherous bed, but this wrong shall be reuenged. And now and then in this discoursing, he entermedled his speeches with a buffet, he on the one side, his wife on the other side fliyng with her nailes to the face of Sertorius, the noyse whereof brought in the assistauntes of Fuluius, who laughyng merily at this mad conceipt, after thei had first parted the fraie, thei began to question with Sertorius, what might be the cause of this broyle, who poore man, altogether ignorant of the mea∣nyng, exclaimed thus. Vnhappie man that I am, who in myne olde yeares, and in the tyme I looked for rest, should bee thus afflicted with soro∣wes. But Brunellus, if thou knewest how thou hast doen me wrong. I know shame would cōstraine thee to be hartely sorie. The Heauens know, and my deedes might well witnesse, that neither was I willyng to defraude Brunellus in any thing, nor to haue voyolated Orienta whom I loue as myne own life, but if misfortune hath befalne vs, it is by other mens leudnesse not
by myne, whose practise if I might learne out, I would so a∣uenge my self, as well should acquite me of all suspition, and make myne innocencie well knowne to the world. With this, interrupted by the forseu of his teares, he fell doune dead with very greefe of mynde. The whole companie, pitiyng the de∣stresse of the olde man, releued hym as thei might, till Brunel∣lus perswaded somewhat by the sorrowes he made, saied thus. Well Sertorius, although many and sundrie occasions might perswade me to suspect, yet truely, thy bitter bewailynges doe somewhat induce me to beleeue thou art iniuried, but seeyng impacience can not now serue to medicine our greefe, let vs finde the meanes to finde out the practiser. An aged and noble Gentleman, a deare freend to Fuluius, and priuie to all the premisses, seyng it now season to breake of all suspitions, saied thus. Sertorius, and Brunellus, you haue seen many yeares, and (as it should séeme) learned but little modestie, that in your friends house who vseth you so courteously, you demeane your selues so dishonourably. Your Daughter sir, is without any staine of good name, yea and worthely fittyng her degree (before my self and sundrie o∣ther Gentlemen) she is solemnie maried to Fuluius, and is now accompanied with her noble housbande, so that Brunellus, you haue no cause to mislike, nor Sertorius, it is now no time for you to sorrowe, Loue made them in one vnitie to conclude freend∣ship, and we as willing to preferre chast Loue, haue vouchsafed the ioynyng of them together, so that satisfie you your self as a Father, for your Daughter hath made a good choyce, and you Sertorius, altogether vnmeete for suche a matche, praise fortune who hath better prouided for ye Gentlewoman, & for your self, I would wishe you to liue in Scienna according to your yeares in deuotion, let these be admitted to the Mariage bed that may liue in the world with blessed encrease. Herevpon, Lodouico de villa noua (for so this Gentleman was called) takyng Brunel∣lus and his wife, the one in one hande, the other on the other, he coueied them to Fuluius bed Chamber, where Brunellus not knowing in what passion to enter his speech said as followeth.
And haue I brought thee vp (Orienta) to follow thyne owne desires, and not to bee leueled by my derection. Is thy hautie courage such as thou disdainest my perswasions in thy procee∣dynges. Alas, vnhappie was I in departyng from Scienna, vn∣luckie thy Mother, but Sertorius most infortunate, who for his benefites thou hast rewarded with so foule disloyaltie: but since the mischeefe is remedilesse, I beseeche thee Fuluius, by the no∣bilitie of thyne Auncesters, so tender my Daughter, that I maie haue cause to blesse thy Weddyng bed, and not occasion to curse thy conueiaunce. Orienta, ouercome with sorrowe could not aunswere, where∣vpon Fuluius comforting her, and the better to confirme bothe father and mother, saied thus. Father (for now Mariage makes me acquainted with that name) if you knewe the zeale wherewith I reuerence your Daughter my wife, you would turne your woe to gladnesse, and reioyce in this successe, beyng assertained of your procee∣dynges. That we loued one the other, Mariage may perswade you, for vnchast Loue alwaies shunneth such conclusions, that I am noble you doubt not, for my Reuenues I am a Signior in Italy, so that neither is this matche to bee contemned, nor Pa∣rentes to be agreeued. For your Daughter, on myne honour here I assure you, that what so in reason you shall request in Dower I will alowe, and so desiryng you to cease your neede∣lesse sorrowes, I beseeche you withdrawe your selues till wee maie prepare vs in readinesse to come forth amongst you. Bothe father and mother rauished with exceedyng ioye to heare the reasonable perswasion of Fuluius, ranne vnto hym embracyng hym with mutuall loue, and in open tearmes bles∣sing their newe vnlooked for sonne in lawe. And hauyng satis∣fied their expectation, and leauyng the newe Maried couple to their priuate pleasures, thei resorted to Sertorius, who Bedlem mad with anger, stampyng and staryng with doutie Duggion in his vnwildy fist, sweares by no Beggers he would be reuen∣ged, callyng Heauen, Yearth, and all to witnesse what iniuries he had sustained: whom when by no meanes he could bee per∣swaded, Brunellus attempted in this forte.
My good freend Sertorius, although my perswasions maie not worke with thee, for that I knowe I haue wronged thee, yet let reason induce thee to be pacient since the cure is reme∣dilesse, thou maiest neither blame the fates, nor accuse me, but thyne owne folly who laied the Trappe to catche the Mouse, and poysoned the baite to beguile the fishe, it was thou brought vs hether to encounter with these troubles, and therefore since by thyne owne endeuours the remedies are vncurable, cease to followe furie whiche is vnnecessarie. The angrie Magnifico, when he had a while stormed, re∣plied thus. Now thou hast buffeted me Brunellus, thou wouldest giue me a plaister, but the wrong shal not be indured though hether∣to I haue bin silent, In myne owne house, at myne owne suite, to be cozoned of myne owne Loue. Oh wicked Fuluius, mil∣lions of plagues light on such Purchaces. Oh cruell Orienta, is this the rewarde of my constauncie, is this the effect of thy beautie, aye me that haue liued to see these miseries. But Bru∣nellus, what I promised Orienta I reuoke it, and I doubt not but to crie quittaunce with Fuluius. Wherevppon (like a mad mā) he runnes about the house seeking for Fuluius, who laugh∣yng very hartely to see our Magnifico in suche choler, caused hym forth with to be shut out of doores, who exclaimyng a long tyme yet without remedie, bethought hym in the ende to take his Horse, and so forthwith to post to Scienna to seeke Iustice. Meane while, all occasions of strife were shut vp, betweene Fuluius, his newe maried wife, her father and freendes, the fa∣ther prefixed a proportion, the Gentleman made a liberall Do∣wrie, eche partie beyng thus pleased, with greate iolitie (beyng accompanied with their cheefe freendes) thei all resorted to Scienna, whiche being once bruited in the Citie, Sertorius feede his Aduocates, he exclaimes on Fuluius before the Iudges, thei readie to redresse wronges perfixt a daie of hearyng, Fuluias and Orienta were summoned, and at the appointed daie thei ap∣peared, the Iudges beyng set, Sertorius becan thus to accuse. Noble Magistrates, beyng sought to by this subtill Gen∣telman for a supply of money, there passed a bargaine betwene
vs bothe, the saile of a Manner of his called Brentio, the price was set 120000. Crownes and accordingly the money paied, I tooke seasure of the Lande, and beyng in possession, I besto∣wed it on a Gentlewoman whom I thought to make my wife, her this craftie seducer so hath compassed, that hauyng gotten her in Mariage, I am by that meanes cut of not only from my wife, but also from my Lande: moreouer cozoned of my Crow∣nes I disbursed in the Purchace. Wherevpon, in cause of Iu∣stice maie it please you to doe me right, that either I may haue my money whiche I paied for the Purchace, or the Manner I haue by my siluer purchased. Fuluius willed to make aunswer for hymself, saied thus. Ser∣torius (noble Signiors) complaineth before your honours of me for no vnlawfull act, and therefore vniustly: if I solde hym my Patrimony, I was worthy the money: if he bestowed his Pur∣chace liberally, it was not in me to hinder it, and beeyng his owne dead, he is to condemne none but hymself: for the Mari∣age of Orienta; she is here let her confesse if I vsed any meane of inforcement, but was concluded in chast and loyall Loue, so that now I am to leaue the whole to the consideration of your Iudgementes, willyng if I haue offended to be punished, if I be faultlesse to be dismissed. The Iudges when thei had well considered on the cause, could conceiue no occasion to condēne Fuluius, adiudged thus. Sertorius, so farr as we can finde, you must beare the burthen of your owne follie, for Fuluius hauing made no breach of law, we haue no punishment for hym that is faultlesse: wherevpon, we counsaile you in your after dealynges to bee more circom∣spect, and for Fuluius, we discharge hym from further trouble. The whole assembly praised the equitie of the Iudges, the pollicie of Fuluius, with the constauncie of Orienta, and thus departed givyng at our Magnifico for his deare bought plea∣sures. Thus to driue awaie dumphes (Gentlemen) I haue tolde you a pretie Noueltie, whiche me thinkes hath past our waie tht we are within kennyng of Lande. And truely your Noueltie is such (said Simonides) as might
well make a Comedie for the mirth, I wot well it hath made some of our eyes to water. In these and suche like talkes passyng the tyme, at last, the gorgious buildynges appeared in sight, and the merrie Gale had blowne thē within compasse of the Hauen, where the Mai∣ster merily receiuyng his due, willes the Marriners to launch out their Cockboate, to set the Passengers on Lande. How Simonides commyng to Athens, was welcomed by Euphues, and of a straunge aduenture that befell. SIMONIDES hauing recouered the Shore, entered the Citie, lodgyng hym self so conueniently as he might, till such tyme as he could finde out Euphues, and because he would not pretermit any occa∣sion, either by enquirie or otherwise, he questioned with his Host and inquired of many, in the ende lightyng of a Scholler, he learned how at that very instaunt, Euphues was come from the Mount Silexse∣dra into the Citie, and was lodged hard by the Market place. With these instructions, he went to finde out our Athenian, and accordyng to direction, deliuered hym Frier Frederickes Letters, who hauyng ouerread the same and considered of the contentes, he gaue Simonides a courteous and freendly wel∣come to the Citie, then bringyng hym to his owne Chamber, he made his prouision one dishe more then ordinarie: their din∣ner beyng ended, for that he would not faile in any one curtesie he proffered Simonides, to accōpanie hym into the Citie, where (if it so pleased hym) he might see those Monumentes, whiche best be fitted a Trauailers fansie. Simonides acceptyng his proffered curtesie, was conducted by Euphues to the seuerall Schooles of the learned Philosophers, shewing him their con∣uenient walkes, their prospect into the Sea, the amenitie of the Lande, and with as muche delight, described hym the situa∣tion
of the Citie. These Nouelties were pleasaunt to the e∣yes of Simonides, but as thei were wanderyng vp and downe the Streates, thei fortuned on the Key to see a greate number of the Citizens, beholdyng (as it should seeme) some straunge accident, whiche made them the willinger to drawe nere and the more serious to beholde, and in truthe this fortuned, a com∣panie of poore Fisher men, entending their fishyng at the Sea, halyng vp their Nettes in hope of good fortune, their happe was to draw vp a Coffin of Lead, wherein thei estéeming some high hid treasure, thei conueied this purchace to the Citie, pre∣sentyng it before the Gouernours as the benefite of their good fortune, who at that instaunt gatheryng together in clusters, to beholde some riche present deriued from the fleetyng Waue, but in stead of greate treasure, thei founde the corse of an aged man (as it seemed) altogether consumed to dust, amongst the remainaunt of whose ashes was found a long written Scrole, the effect whereof was this. FOrsaking flood, to whiche with bootelesse hope, J whilome did, my bodie recommend, J come to Athens, for to claime my due, VVho here deserude, a royall Tombe to haue. Ne bootes it not, myne ashes to reuiue, Since in these liuelesse lines, myne Image is, Erst in this state, by dome of power diuine, Licurgus poynted, was by deepe conceipt, To fashion raines, vnto your wanderyng willes, ƲƲhose tongue inspir'd, with secrete rules of right, Made Athens Greece, and Grecia Athens Towne, And as from Delphos, Phaebus did inspire, So plast J truth, the Lodestone of your liues.
But as amidst, a swarme of sondry sinnes, A little good, is shadowed by the bad, So in so many, yeares of flowryng wealth, A proude contempt, hath banisht continence And glut of golde, hath gorgd you full of vice. So I who banished, my self from Greece, And bound th' athenian, Lordes by solemne oth. ƲƲithout infringyng, of my sacred lawes, To tread the path, that J had wisely wrought. Till backe againe, Licurgus should retire, And forst from waue, the cinders of my self For breache of troth, to Athens to returne: ƲƲherein vpbraidyng, tearmes they may rebuke, The fickle faith, th' athenian Princes held. How runs the world, whē where should wisedoms raigne, A flatteryng tongue, preferres to royall trone, And honours pace, by bribes not common voyce, Contempt of Gods, attempt of that is ill. My Countrey soyle, hath late seduced thee, And what of olde, my painfull pen set downe, Like Sibiles bookes, by Numa are refusde, Yet hath not that, myne olde acquainted loue. Be buried with, the Maisters liuely forme, But that myne ashes, shall restore suche fruite, As walking long, amidst the Lesian feeldes,
Jt gathered hath, by tearme of many yeares, And in this Scrole, O Athens what so is, Beleeue me well, my self did not deuise, But in the secrete, adites of the Gods, The lines are left, for euerlastyng daies, This second lesson, lent me by the powres, I meane to leaue, behind in Athens Towne, For these poore reliques, of decaied dust, Returne them thence, from whence the Gods them sent. But for the preceptes, that J leaue behinde, Coate them in bookes, of euerlastyng fame, This wishe J done, and these my censures be, Jn choyce of Prince, compare not flockes of freendes, But store of vertues, for the Kyngly throne, Breedes many sweetes, or els to many sowres. For as the Prince, suche will the Subiect be, To whom admit, suche counsaile for to guide. As rather seeke succeedyng stiles of fame, Then pompious wealth, to leaue their wanton hires. VVhose eyes may see, and followe that is iust, Not formyng Justice, like a nose of waxe, VVhiche quickly leaues, th'impression it had once. VVhom thus I wishe, in studiyng still for peace, To worke the feate, by no vnlawfull meanes, Least happie ende, be spoyld by leud attempt.
By suche vaine meanes, Kyng Phirrus would not winne, Then suche vaine meanes, let noble myndes refraine, Jn peace adore, the secretes of the Gods, By whom your peace, her cheefest of spryng had, And if aspiryng, thrist of others raine, Thy naybour Kyng, doe force thy sworde vnsheath, Appease the powres, at first with holy vowes, Next with the Grecian Prince a Nester chuse, ƲƲho may consult, when Aiax would attempt, so traine your youth, that idle rest maie not Enforce them fall, vpon their enemies sword, But teache in peace, how to preuent in warre, To take occasions, groweth from the Gods, And blest is he, that can preuent in tyme. Giue warrior wealth, in quiet calme to liue, That in distresse, he maie the better fight, By this it fortunes, that not nipt by want, He will not bende, his eares to riche rewardes. Beleeue me Athens, this is certaine true, Desire of gaine, hath power on powers and men. And needie men, will sonest bend to bowe, Preuent this errour, with aduised eye, From forraine warres, vnto thy Court in peace, Thou Prince that in, my Countrey loues to raigne. Beware of Pride, mongst those amidst the traine,
For vaine opinions, makes men to aspire, And as disposde, so feede thou humours to Yet make a medlie, of the sweete and sowre, For though some bende, by wordes some force not blowes, Turne them the edge, let others haue the blunt, And if they like, the shewes of Kyngly state, Hang sharpened sworde, vpheld by horses hire, Ore flatterers heades, to make them knowe the cares, That waite on those, whom honour doth aduaunce. As for the choyce, of Judges in the state: ƲƲhose errours cause, the Kyng to beare the blame, Chuse suche as measure, not their priuate gaine, But Princes glory, and the subiectes good, ƲƲith whom let right, so ouermaister wrong, As tyrauntes tauntes, maie neuer them affright, ƲƲhom neither fauour, may by Letters winne: Nor Midas compas, with a Mase of golde Jn rulyng thus, the good perceiuyng then, That honour shall, betyde them doyng well, ƲƲill labour more, and more in Countreis cause, The bad confirmde, that fauour will not yeeld, And breach of lawe, shall stoope to Iustice sworde, ƲƲill raine their willes, from working wicked wyles, Thus eche estate, by wisedome leueld out, Preuent thou then, suche meanes as may corrupt,
Restraine the greedie, mynd of neighbours good, ƲƲho pilles the poore, to make his fleeces fat. And cast a coller, on the headstrong Jade, Least loth to yeeld, he breake the Riders necke, Excesse is that, whiche onely Athens spoyles In that the riche, to honours are preferde, Eche plies it now, by hooke and crooke to gaine, Jn hope by wealth, to clime the steppes of state, Preuent the meanes, the matter then must faile Prefix reward, to that whiche profite bringes, And punishe that, whiche onely fostereth vice, So idle artes, will sone be laide aside, And eche will followe, that whiche maie preferre, Jn choyce of Citizens, conserue these rules, As Romaines did, as recordes doe resite, Jf hand be hardined by assidious toyle, That man is meete, to haue a subiectes rome, Jn softined fistes, small profite doeth consist: ƲƲho labours well, doeth scarce imagine ill, All onely factions, first from idle spring, ƲƲho onely serue, to serue vsurpers turne, ƲƲho when thei finde, no meanes to maintaine warre ƲƲill feare attempt, or climyng catch a fall: Beleeue me what, so Prince preferres these rules, He shall conceiue, the profite thei doe bryng,
But for those weales, wherein the wealth consist, Of Athens good, keepe thou vnto thy self, Let not thyne enemie, knowe thy priuate power, For while thou holdst, hym in suspicious thought. Thy little power, will make hym thinke it greate, Thy greate supplies, will make hym feare to warre. Cut of suspition, to thy foe of feare, Make hym beleeue, thy sworde is readie drawne, ƲƲith Masse of golde, supplie not neighbours neede, Least he refrainyng, till his fist be full: Assaile thee then, with those thy golde maintainde, And make thee glad, to stoope to seruile yoke, In eche defence, suppose there is offence, Put not thy power, into a traitours fist: For flatteryng shewes, Imbassads maie preferre, See and not see, and searche by questions straunge VVhat hidden venome, is in flatteryng guile, Thou maist in this, full sone finde out the false, Jn plighted leage, preuent all cause of breache, Yet if alies, first faile in fixed faith, Take thou reuenge, as though thou knewst it not. Disceite is well rewarded by disceite: By this those illes, whiche once by breache of lawe, VVhiche your Licurgus, leueld for your weale: You ouerslippe, you shall in tyme preuent.
And J shall rest in peace amongst the Sainctes, Reioysing in, my Countreis happie state: This leaue I witnesse, of my tried zeale, This craue J last, before bothe Godes and men, That thou O Athens, for Licurgus sake, VVill not accept, this precept of renowne: VVhiche as in breefe, thou hast presented here, So let no age, extinguishe proofe thereof. This wishe J done, and this my last adewe, Jn feare of Gods, O Athens still proceede, And flie excesse, and thus I bid farewell. This sedull ouer read by one of the cheefest Magistrates of the Citie, the whole assemblie continued mute along space, in the ende, an auncient Philosopher (as he seemed) bespake him thus. Vnsearchable (O ye Athenians) is the power of the Godes, by whose benefites, since this Towne hath been a long tyme maintained, yet cease thei not by their euerlastyng wisdomes, to continue it, to whose beneficence, if we compare our ingra∣titude, we shall iustly conclude, that the Godes created vs to many vertues, and wee haue bound our selues bondslaues to monstrous vices: If therefore we looke into our owne states, and compare our aunciters good, with our ill, we shal confirme Licurgus dead testimonie, and pointyng to our best Athenian Philosophers, we shall touch this one with the blot of auerice, and note that other with the blemishe of vaine glorie. If by the hidden workyng of the Godes we are put in me∣morie of our escapes, let vs mend them. And since with more fauour then to other Cities, thei haue blessed vs with more circomspection, in reuerence of their bountie let vs become more circomspecte. This scedull presenteth vnto our Prince pollicie: to our
Religious sanctimonie: to our Layetie continency. By excesse onely we are found to haue falne, hauing gathered in so many yeres ouer passed, many errors, recouered no vertues. Oh hap∣pie Athens, when Agis not respectyng the furie of his com∣parte nor Kyng, began to pull downe the pride of Athens. Oh vnfortunate Citie when by the diligence of Pericles, Golde brought pride into Athens. We stand amased now confoun∣ded in our selues by our seldome asspectes, impartyng the gil∣tinesse of our conciences, neither hauyng that confirmitie of mynd in vs that befitteth Philosophers, nor that valewe to at∣tempt as in the daies of the Law maker Licurgus we once had. If we will be wise, why are our attemptes sauced with repen∣taunce: if learned, why are we blind in discipline. If we remē∣ber our selues of our former estates, how we haue been glori∣fied in our well doyng, contemned in our ill, how accounted of for our expeditions, how disdained for our flatteries, we shal find all our goodes to procede from good counsaile, as our bad∣des from contempt of the Godes. So that now thus it standeth, since the floudes, the fates, yea the Flisian feildes are so fauourable, that the one casteth vp, the other blesseth, the last greeteth vs with heauenly documen∣tes and necessary forewarninges, let the head rule the feet, eche member folow the superior, all conclud in a mediocritie, and not only leaue those memories ingrafted in table of record, but also imprinte them in our hartes, to the satisfaction whereof, O you Athenian Senators, I coniure you to applie all your studies. The graue old father hauing thus finished his oration, ech alowed his counsaile, and the Magistrates of the Citie hauing accordyng to the direction of the sedull, redeliuered the coffin vnto the flouds, with many solemne cerimonies performed vn∣to Neptune, thei vppon aduised deliberation, did commit the scrole vnto the common treasure, as an euerlastyng and me∣morable miracle. Fuphues and Simonides beholdyng all these thinges with incredible admiration, departed towarde their lodgyng, where after thei had a while rested themselues, Euphues brake of their
vnnecessary silence thus. It is neither occasion (noble Spaniard) that preferreth, nor pollicie whiche procureth but the Godes whiche fauour these actions. Thou art come to Athens to see but blind guides, yea, blind are we in coulers that should know all proportions. Fredericke my freende, hath presented thee with a flower without sent, with a bare shadow ond no substance, with a ver∣tuous towne in name, but bad in nature. So that vnlesse thou canste make of venemous confections, holsome Triacles, of poysonable Mummi comfortable Methridat, in seekyng here for Sibill thou shalt encounter a Siren, and for the image of A∣lexandre the protrature of Jrus. I haue seen much (Simonides) and marked somewhat, yet in Athens neuer knew I more fooles lesse Philosophers. The Rose sauoreth sweetly yet hath his prickell, Mercurie is snow white yet deadly poison, the Peacocke faire plumed yet black footed, the Athenians sweete tonged yet ill manired. If as Demostines trauiled to Corinth, to inioy Layes, Simonides be come to Athens to learne fashions, as the Philosopher dis∣dained to be lauishe for a little pleasure, Simonides will bee as curious to imitat so vaine presidentes. In Athens it fareth now, as in Rome it did once, here plenty maketh vs proud, their high honours made them haughtei. As these errours I note are incident to these Cities, so are the vertues the nominated in sedull, practised farre of from this Citie, which when better opportunitie serueth, I will not onely vtter to thy pleasure, but also open to thy profite. Meane tyme, if it please thee to take parte of a Scholers repast, thou shalt haue the benefite perhappes of a morrall discourse, which may make recompence for the slendernesse of thy diet. Simonides, comparyng all Euphues curtesies together, knit vp his aunswer in this forme. The benefite that is reapt by good counsaile (gentle Eu∣phues) as it profiteth him that by experience vttereth, so con∣firmeth it the other who as yet was ignorant. So fareth it with me, that hearyng those sage preceptes
that passe from thee: I am not onely perswaded of the singu∣laritie of thy wisdome, but also inured to the imitation of thy vertues. Many casualties happen, whiche although thei be be∣neficiall vniuarsallie, yet confirme they some one perticuler more then the rest, and I thinke that these casualties as now hath happened in Athens, when as such a one at the instante is resident, who with eloquence may blazen out the myracu∣lousnesse of the accident, and by good admonition subdue the errours of this Citie. As I came to Athens to see it, so sailed I hether to here thee, and though the delight of the one bee somewhat aunswerable to my trauell, yet thy eloquence is that whiche onely excedeth the report. For this Citie, I find it more faughtie then famous, for thee, more learned then I haue yet hard spoken. As for the noueltie that latly happined, if so the state be ru∣led any where as there it is set downe, I doubt not but peace hath there seated her self in securitie, & that either the Climate is so gratious that all are wise from their cradell, and all for∣tunate by the benifit of the place. For thy repast, I accept it: for thy morrall discourse I wishe for it, and desire in as shorte space I might be made copartner of thy conformitie, as I shall with thankfull harte bee pertaker of thy diet. This saied, thei sat downe, and hauyng satisfied them selues with suche proui∣sion as then was prepared for them, Euphues at length began thus. Simonides, though the coursenesse of thy diet bee not accor∣ding to the bountie of the court, yet here amongst vs students, we rather esteme of a Socraticum conuiuium, than the excessiue dainties of the banquets of Cleopatra, thinking that no more than necessary repast is requisite for the professors of sciences, especially to satisfie nature, whereas in respecte of the soule it can not be sufficiently confirmed with the sweete preceptes of philosophie. Truely {quod} Simonides (interrupting Euphues,) suche as the complections of the bodie and the disposition of the soule is, such esteeme I the externall actions, and the internal delight,
as for this meale we haue made, wee haue I confesse suffici∣ently serued our appetites, but for the soule, it hathe sundrie o∣perations, and what one likes, another loathes. Truth it is, saide Euphues, that Ʋenus delighteth her selfe in daliance, where Diana alonely aloweth chastitie, Democri∣tus soliciteth him selfe in laughter, but wise Cato in grauitie and sadnesse: eche nature as it is disposed fo worketh it, which maketh apparance euen nowe in my selfe, who tho whilome I liked loue, nowe loath I luste, though once I counted Cupid for a God, nowe I account vaine loue godlesse. But it may be Simonides in this my nature, and your con∣stitution we disagree, you fire, I frost, you amorous, I studi∣ous, which if it be so, I doubt not but to sitte such occasions, as touching that most nearest which hitteth you most feately, I may in this imitate Phirne the harlot, who beeing presented by Praxetiles the Painter with that picture which soeuer that best wiihin his whole storie shoulde please hir fantasie, she very carefull to make a warie choice of so pleasaunt a giste, caused one sodainely to informe the Painter that hys shoppe was on fire, who amongst the rest of his tables, demaunding if the pi∣cture of Cupid was vnuiolated, was cunningly compassed by Phirne in this, who satisfied hir expectation by the opinion of tye workemaister himselfe. So shall Euphues in searching out of dispositions worke wyth Simonides, if thou giue me but an inckling, I wil take an Item, if thou bewray by a wincke, I will compasse by a wyle, and hauing the reine in hande re∣straine thy affection, and knowing the size of thy foote, fit thee wyth a pantofie. O Simonides, Fredericke of Naples knowes well, and Eu∣phues of Athens hath tried well, that the she beare can knowe hir whelpes, the Turtle her true loue, the shape his shadow, the Criple his crutch, the Mathematician his compasse, who hath tried loue can des e loue, who hath felt the fire can shun the flame, who hathe offered at Ephesus knowes Ʋenus chiefe temple. I my self do gather by thy conclusion of dispositions, and by my friendes opinion of thy trauell, that Simonides for all hos experience hathe his coltes toothe, that Simonides in
seruing our Lord forgets not our Ladie, and that Simonides is he that onelie hath trod the path of repentaunce, and is yet to learne what it is to shunne errours. Charilaus of Lacedaemon, being demaunded why all the sta∣tutes of the Gods were armed, made aunswere, that by it was prefigured to the Lacedaemonians, that in being assuredly fen∣ced in their soules from vaine affections, they should imitate the Gods, who had armed bodies not affectionate deities. As Charilaus to his countrymen, so Fuphues to Simonides, if thou wilt be accounted fruitfull in trauell, be not lauishe in affection, if a man led by reason, eschew lasciuiousnesse, if loue be vnprofitable perseuer not. Euerie chaste eye iudgeth not by coulors, and euerie wyse affection passeth not by likelihoodes, and when as I promised thee a morall discourse to amend thy fare, it shall bee no other than a cooling carde to alay thy fancie: Simonides interrupte¦ting hys attempted purpose sayde thus: O Euphues, beware least in bewraying my errours, thou open thine owne escapes, I confesse thou haste touched mine opinions, and yet perhaps canst hardly perswade by thy propositions. An inueterate euil hauing taken deepe roote is hardly in∣uested from hys holdfast: I haue sene seuerall cities, gathered many experiences, forsaken sundrie opinions, but in that only which thou wouldest reprooue, I haue perseuered moste con∣stant, and herein do I distinguish my loue from lightnesse, for vaine, affection, makyng but a light impression, is soone dis∣placed where the loue I beare to my Clarinda of Ciuil, was ne∣ther a first sights fancie, neyther can be extinguished before my last minutes sighing. But for that Euphues hath attempted to disswade, Simoni∣des will be attentiue to heare, and if there growe a Metamor∣phosis by Athenian perswasion, it may be I will returne my fancies agayne to my countrey Ciuil. Fuphues pausing a while of thefe speaches at the last brake into these tearmes. As Zopirus the Persian for the loue of Darius, so Euphues of Athens for the loue of Simondes: hee spared not to deforme
hys members to subdue the Babilonians, I not to disclose mine errours to confirme thy vnsteadinesse. In my prime youth I was amarous in Naples, and there∣fore vnfortunate, I loued Lucilla, and therefore vnluckie, my serious seruices were requited wyth light mislikes, and ther∣fore vainely attempted, my confirmitie grewe by experience, and herein was I happy. Simonides is now he whome Euphues was once, he loueth, but whome, a woman, and she sliding, he serueth, what saint, Clarinda, and is he sure shee is constant? I feare me vnlesse Tirpandrus lenifie by Musicke, Cli∣temnestra wyll not be chaste, and tho our Spaniard bydes tor∣ture for hys Maistresse, yet may it be doubted that she vouchsa∣feth a minion. Euery cleare morrow maketh not a fayre day, neyther e∣uery swalow a sommer, al hooke nosed men are not Ciceroes, nor euerie blemished face ye Image of Alexander, euery beau∣tifull is not vertuous, ne euerie sweete face of sounde behaui∣our: Helena cornuted Menelaus, yet was she comely, Dalida bewrayed, Sampson, yet was she louely. Eche sweete shape is not perfite, a staine wil bee seene on the picture of Ʋenus her selfe. O Simonides, when I compare mine houres studying to my dayes louing, I finde no one attempt in loue so commen∣dable, that mine houres reading confirmes not to be corrupte. Truely, as the teares of the heart are bitter, so are the at∣tempts in loue balesome, as the teares of the boare are swete, so are the refrainings from beautie moste necessary. Alas sweete friende, little wottest thou the venome the serpent couereth vnder sweete shadowes, the poyson shee pre∣senteth vnder pleasaunt aspectes. As it fareth wyth Ligus the woman, fo falleth it out wyth beautie the seducer, Ligus, rather than to bewray her hidden sonne, esteemeth not the renting of her bowelles, beautie rather than to open her im∣perfections, careth not wyth howe many blemishes thou stai∣nest her. Zeno Citicus beholding a prowde precise felow passing o∣uer
a quagmire, verie daintely reprooued his errour thus, hee doth worthily suspecte the quagmire, in that he cannot beholde his proportion in it as in a glasse, women in their owne opini∣ons, in aught that suspitiously toucheth their honours, passe it ouer slightly, and by this meanes vnto the wise bewray their vanity, who demying with their daintinesse to daūce in anet, are by the circumspecte founde guiltie of those errours, which by their mincing ouerslips they would haue pretermitted. I neuer sawe in beautie that which was not sauced wyth soure, in loue, that which sauoured not of follie, in blinde affe∣ction, that which was not repented wyth many hearte-break∣ings. The pompous glorie of the worlde maye intice, for they beare a shewe hf continuance, promotions may perswade for why they are the benefites of good fortune. Loue may neuer by any assumptions allure, when as neither the bodie is affected with certaine honor, nor the soule recompenced wyth the least perfection whatsoeuer. Wyth like happinesse possesse louers their Maistresses, as Ʋatinius hys Consulship, whose honour neyther froste nor spring, winter or sommer did euer beholde, as Tully pretily iested, and whose continuance of fauor depending on instants, hath but a dayes breeding, and a moneths ending. In loue what seeth the eie, lasciuiousnesse, what heareth the eare, lasciuiousnesse, what vttereth the tongue, lasciuiousnes, what thinketh the hart, lasciuiousnesse, what inureth the body, lasciuiousnesse. Truely Simonides, the follie of affection is wonderfull, yet are the errours of beautie more admirable, when as in her selfe she is but a painted sepulchre, and in her actions, the demini∣sher of all naturall and morall reason. What neede I repeate former examples, to confirme later attempts? O Simonides, I had a friend, who now beyng sepa∣rated from me, abideth in a delectable Iland wyth the Mistris of his pleasures, in whose loue I founde warre, and straighte truce, nowe truce, and then warre, as the Comedian saith: ye when the agony of loue gouerned his proceedings, neyther
was the league of friendship accompted of, nor serious perswa∣sions alowed of. I haue heard of many that were madde for loue, yet neuer heard I of anie that were wise in loue, I haue read of conque∣rours that by loue haue become esfeminate, I neuer founde a∣ny (though neuer so great a Monarch, that was not seduced by loue, I haue known the wise haue bene besotted by fancie, yet neuer knew I fancie that made a wise man. If as the Camelion by the aire men liue by loue, as the best is in a moment transformed to as manie coloures as it behol∣deth, so is the louer afflicted wyth as manie cogitations as hee imagineth of, now happie, straight haplesse, nowe fortunate, straight frowarde, now blessed, straight cursed. Now Simonides, since thou seest the soure, choose the swete, admit perswasion as a Cullice to comfort, or a sword to destroy as an Antidotum to confirme, or an Aconitum to confound. Refuse loue for it will harme thee, the greene grasse shrow∣deth the blacke serpent, the painted pot the deuouring poyson, the faire woman the wanton minde? hathe thy Maistresse re∣pulsed thee, then arte thou happie, for, if her fortune were to prooue lasciuious, then how blessed art thou to loose her, if too wise, she woulde be too busie, if foolish, she woulde be too com∣bersome: so that he might bee counted to bee ouer franticke, that for a bed pleasure, woulde bee troubled with the nursing of so vnweldie a babe. If men woulde dispose their eyes as warily, as women dis∣playe their beauties, garishly they shoulde borrow birdlime from the fouler. and binde the birder by compasse in his owne briars. Atatus Pbilometor, was wonte in his princely gardens, to set Aconitum, and to weede out the blessed thistle, and wo∣men in the promptest and readiest wittes that be, ingraffe fol∣lies, and dispossesse vertues. As if Euripides from laughter, Simonides coulde refraine from loue, the Poet shoulde not so much be recommended for his tragedies, as Simonides for hys vertues. If men were as throughly armed wyth perswasions as
Dionisius wyth bad clothing, they would aswell scape the le∣wers of fancie, as the tyrant the furie of the souldiour. But for that night calleth awaie, and thy drowping eies perswade me thou wouldest be a sleepe, Simonides, let this suf∣fice, that since loue is vnnecessarie, thou refuse it, and since the pleasure is not permanent, builde not thou thy opinions on it, and since I perswade with reason perseuer thou not in error, so shalte thou thincke thy trauaile wel imployed to Athens, and thy returne shall be more fortunate to Ciuil. Simonides wyth hys eyes full of sleepe, began dreamingly to determine thus. Although thy eloquence shoulde make me Argus, yet the matter thou talkest of inforctth mee to bee Endemon, what is subdued in thee, is rooted in mee, so that, thoughe perswasion may confirme for a while, yet if fancie doe but a little kindle the coales, we shal soone haue fire: but for that night calleth on, and I desire to be more readie to morrowe, to heare the ac∣complishment of thy promise touching the Iland thou talkest of, I beseech thee let vs vse the aduice of our pillows, whether this nights discourse be auaileable. And doe Simonides ({quod} Euphues) so perchaunce at Sunne rising, thou wilt either repent thee of a folly, or remember thée of a good lesson. This said, Euphues conueied Simonides to his Lodging, and after betooke hymself to his owne couch, where reposing them selues a conuenient space, at last the messenger of the Sunne with pleasaunt rednesse be coloured Euphues face: who beeyng very studious betooke hymself to his bookes: And after some deliberation, thinking it good time to goe visite his new guest, he came vnto hym whom he founde readie, and after a gentle Bon ioure past betwene them, thei determined to take the aire: And walkyng out into a pleasaunt Groue, hauyng a goodly prospect into both Sea and Champion: for it was eminent, Si∣monides began thus. Feeend Euphues, beholdyng now the waue, whiche presen∣ted Athens yesterdaie with Licurgus good counsaile, I am brought in memorie of a certaine report of yours, wherein you
specified an Ilande, whereas those documentes were practised whiche the sedull presented, maie it please you now, from your bitter inuectiues against Loue, to fall to your worthie declara∣tion of this Ilande, wherevpon perhappes I maie be perswa∣ded, that hauyng past ouer a greate parte of the worlde co see fashions, I maie make a fewe monethes saile thether to learne vertue. Euphues hauyng paused a little space, in the ende brake out into these speaches. Truely Simonides, thou at this instaunt perswadest me to the remembrauece of that in whiche once, hauyng placed my cheefest felicitie, I now am almost rauished with the remem∣braunce onely of the place. Thou desirest a report of that noble Spanyard, which with out wonder I did not see, nor without pleasure thou canst not heare. And herevpon I can not imagine, whether with more admi∣ration I maie speake of the situation of the place, or the dispo∣sition of the people, the one is so worthely fenced by nature, the other so noblie nurtured by vertue. For the Ilande it self, in olde tyme it hath been called Al∣bion, and after by the ariuall of the Troyan Trauailer Brutus, it was called Britanie, afterwarde brought vnder the gouerne∣ment of Engustus, it was called Engustland, and dy succession as now continueth the name of England. The Gouernours hereof by their manifolde vertues, haue not onely filled Europe, but also replenished Asia, the Climate very beneficial for prouision to maintaine a State, neither wā∣tyng Wooll for clothyng, nor Corne and Cattle for foode: So that if any one Countrey in the worlde bee blessed with bene∣fites, I thinke this Iland happie, beyng fenced by the Occean against forraine Inuasions, and gouerned by good lawes to a∣uoyde populer Mutinies. The Princes haue euer been ruled by discrete gouernours, thei haue conquered and subdued many Nations, the Jrishe are vnder their subiection, from the French by Conquest thei bare a title: yea, so happie this Nation is, as in their peace all Prin∣ces
wonder, and in their fauour eche Countrey glorieth. So that it can hardly be saied, whether thei bee more feared for their power, or honoured for their prowesse. Generally, thei are all valiaunt not fearyng Warlike attemptes, but with as greate wisedome preuent, as with valewe thei performe. Of personage thei are seemely, of behauiour comely, of ap∣parell costly, in entertainyng straungers none more readie: re∣ligious thei be without hipocrisie: serious in preferryng their Countrey: to their fréendes Lambes: to their enemies Lyons. The men beyng thus, what more to bee wondered at then their women: Beautie in them hath bestowed her sweetest co∣lours: Nature hath benefited them with all seemely proportiō: Art finished them with science and affabilitie. They are sweete in behauiour, without lightnesse, stedfaste in louing, yet not lasciuious, constant in religion, not super∣stitious, braue in attire, yet are not proude. Thus Simonides, countrey, lawes, men, women of all sorts are thus good by nature, and of this behauiour through wise go∣uernement: now seeing al these perfections do thus concurre in one, of what exquisitenesse shoulde the prince be, whose sub∣iectes are so perfect. Truely the Englishe regiment (to eche mans admiration Simonides) at this day is so gouerned, as neither Salomon in Iurie for iustice, nor Alfonsus of Aragon, for affabilitie, nor Ʋespasian of Rome, for correction, are to bee compared to hir that wildeth the kingly scepter there, who being a virgin, and making her vertue answearable to hir renowmed fathers vic∣tories, she hath as much to glory in her pece, as he in his con∣quests: sprung she is out of two the renowmed houses of Lan∣caster and Yorke,, in whose birth (as it seemeth) the cruel mu∣tinies forepast (by reason of affectation of dignitie) betweene those noble families, is euen determined. She, as report runneth, these xxv. yeares hath so gouerned her dominions, as neyther conspiracie coulde either escape the circumspection of the gouerner, nor mercie bee pretermitted, if submission were preferred: This blessed Princesse Eliza∣beth, hath now dominion ouer this bountifull Ilande, whose
benefites of nature being so great, as none can matche them: yet such affinitie haue the perfections of the minde wyth the proportion of the bodie, as neither art can cypher out the per∣son in approued colours, nor wisedome conceiue the inwarde vertues since they exceede imagination. I haue read of many, that for their wisedome, excellencie, and other their vertues were worthy of souerainty, yet neither Helerna, for wisedome, nor Zoe for policie maye matche hir: Hermodica she is for hir proportion, Aspasia for her knowlege in philosophie, fitter to gouerne a kingdome than Zenobia, & meeter than Arete to teache Aristippus, for chastitie shee mat∣cheth Adesia, for eloquence Cornelia, for religion Fabiola, my tongue faileth me to declare, not her vertues, to supplie mat∣ter: her princely maiestie is mixed with natural clemencie as the rose amiddest the brambles, so her vertues amongest many women, I must wyth Politianus as of his Cassandra, so of this Elizabeth end thus: O decus Anglorum virgo quas dicere grates quasué referre, parem quod etiam honore me tuarum literarum non dedignaris, &c. For her counsaile they are sage, prudent in all things, neg∣ligent in nothing, for their lawes, they haue relation, firste to religion, next to determination, thirdly, prescription and cu∣stome, they auow titles, al courts whatsoeuer, and pleas what so they be hauing paste the afperite of the lawe, may yet be or∣dered by conscience, so that if aught be neglected by errour in pleading, may be relieued by equitie of conscience. Their ministerie is ruled by discreete pastors, their prea∣chers reprehende sinne liberally, the common sorte zealously amende, great is the loue of the subiect towards their Prince, hartie the loue of the prince towards the subiect: but who that but looketh into the Princes court, shall finde, not onely cause to praise, but to wonder. The Nobilitie be so valiant, the La∣dies so continent, their traines so well ordered: beautiful may∣dens be there yet not too amorous, bountiful Nobles be there
yet not too prodigall: all courtlike actions are so sauced with discretion, as neither excesse make aught to be misliked of, nor niggardlinesse cause any thing to be exclaimed on. Truth it is, Elizabeths mantion is an Academie, no court where men are so eloquent, women so prudent, al so continent. There is not the pompe of Seleucus, yet is the state magni∣cent, there is not the traine of Darius, yet suche are they there, as be gallant: the end is, the English court excelleth all prin∣ces palaces for vertues, and matcheth them for vnstained glo∣rie, for the practise of morall precepts what countrie so fortu-tunate, as equitie ruleth at home, so iniuries are not preferred abroade: yea, but looke into one yeares action there, and it wil folow, that whatsoeuer Licurgus left here in paper, thou maiest beholde there in practise. The countrey being so fortunate as it is, the countriemen so blessed as they be, the lawes so vpright as they are, O Simo∣nides it seemeth me, that to an vnbrideled minde it were beste there to fitte a reine, for an vnruly colte there to get a snaffle, for an vnweldie heiffer there to prouide a yoke. And if in aught thou alow my counsaile: I wish thee make one iorney thither, where by my courteous friendes thou shalt not faile of entertainement, nor by the abundance of all wisdome want to learne some wit. I wil recommend thee by my letters, pray for thee in thy trauaile, and all the time I shall there heare of thy abode, bet∣ter thee if I can wyth my counsailes. If thou art delighted by this discourse I am glad of it, if it please thee to shape this Iourney, I will reioice in it, I had rather thou shouldest saile into England to learne wisedome, then stay in Athens to continue errours: This saide, Euphues ceased, and Simonides, sighingly said thus: O Euphues, I thinke them blessed from aboue that by their paineful trauaile, haue attained vnderstanding, and by good aduisement, restrained their former follies. The vrietie of thy discourse makeh me loath, the vanitie of my dayes misspent, and desire earnestly as well to be parta∣ker of thy experience, as of thy trauailes.
My deare freend, though thou haddest not counsailed me to seeke England, I would haue chaunged Athens, but since the commendation of it is so rare, my trauell thither shall bee more hastie, on which I both request thy counsayles, and re∣fuse not thy letters: onely this I wish, that thou returne my cause of trauell to Naples, and commend vnto Fredericke hys countryman trauailyng towardes England. In these and such like exhortations, demonstrations, coun∣sailes, and conferences, they passed ouer the forenoone, the mid¦day called them to the remembrance of their noone diet, wher∣vpon taking their way homeward, they set them down to din∣ner, whereas Simonides onely fed hym selfe wyth the remem∣brance of his trauell, and on the sodaine, vnlooked for, a Pylot aryued out of England with letters directed to Euphues, and came to his lodging at that instant when they were repasting themselues, who friendly receiued by our Athenian, was presented wyth lines from Philautus, wherevppon breaking the seales, and ouer reading the substance, he gaue it Simonides to ouerlooke, who reported it to folow in this forme: Philautus to his friend Euphues. IF thy musing in Silexsedra (friende Euphues) hath made thee mute, or forgetfulnesse of thy friendes altered thy wonted customes, Philau∣tus in England lamenteth thy misfortune, and bewaileth thy imperfections: though my pen be not acquainteh with sweete phrases as thine is, yet conty∣nueth my heart his olde remembraunce of thee as it ought to do, and though Euphues be musing on his intricate studies, yet is Philautus mindeful of his olde acquaintaunce, if thou compare thy friendes in England to thy families in Athens. thou shalt finde some here thou wouldest accept of, though thou were a Timon: since thy departure from vs, and thy last
letters to me, there hath nothing happened here worthie the reporte, nor nothing more wished for than thy presence: my violet continueth her sauour still, wishing her sent would ei∣ther pierce to Athens to drawe thee by delight hither, or that thy person (seuered from his melancholie aspectes) were with vs present to passe the time and be merrie. Surius thin∣keth thee so wedded io thy bookes, that thou forgettest thy freendes: Camilla imagineth the chaunge of aire hath altered thy good customes: so that, if nowe wee had thee here, wee shoulde either account the place newe for thee, or thou new for the place, or both too new for rhy friends: Good Euphues if Philautus may perswade, vouchsafe thou either wyth manie letters to satisfie our desires, or by one trauell, put ende to all misdeeming by the one thou shalt content vs with thy cour∣tesies, by the other, confirme vs in our chiefest pleasures: as wee all salute thee, so wee would all see thee: This messenger hauing occasion to trafique in Naples, is sent of purpose to vi∣site thee, who hauing haste to returne, I praye thee dispatche with expedition, and eyther helpe to furnishe him with thy presence, or fraught him with thy letters. Thine, or not his owne, Philautus. This accident wonderfully delighted bothe these Gentle∣men, Euphues in hearyng from his freendes, Simonides to see all thynges so happely to sorte out for the conueniencie of his trauaile. Wherevpon, learnyng of the Maister what tyme he might be readie to set saile, and vnderstandyng that on the mo∣rowe he would be readily prepared, Simonides bargained with hym for his passage, and makyng all thyngs readie against the next day, he besought Euphues not to forget him in his Letters: who takyng hymself to his studies, and leauyng the Maister and Simonides to their affaires, shaped this freendly aunswere to Philautus freendly lines.
Euphues to Philautus. IF I muse in Silexsedra (Philautus) on my studies, yet am I not vnmyndfull of my freendes, and if forgetfulnesse in ought preuaile with me, it is ra∣ther by committing my errours to obliuion, then by ouerslippyng the manifolde curtesies of my dearest frendes: If thou art myndfull of Euphues and constant in freend∣ship, thy freend reioyceth at thy staiednesse, and concludeth, that Mariage hath wrought wonders. Ʋpon the very deliuery of thy Letters, I was recountyng thy happinesse, and so gloried in the be∣nefite of thy good fortune. And though in person J can not my self satisfie thy expectation by reason of my businesse, yet haue I sent thee my second self to be befrended by thy acquaintaunce. I com∣mend this Gentleman as my self to Surius, whom I praie thee sa∣lute from me, assuryng hym that my last lesson was to auoyde in∣gratitude, so that my booke teache me that, whiche he altogether suspecteth to be farre from my studie. If thy vyolet smell sweete to thee, she delighteth me, assuryng her this, that she can not more zealously wishe for me, then J wishe well to her. For Camilla, since she knowes chaunge of soyle can not alter maners, I doubt not but she will accompt Euphues as constaunt in loyall affection, as she beautifull in her wiuely modestie. Though J may not satisfie thee with my presence, I praie thee content thee with my present, in these Letters thou shalt read the lines of tried zeale, in this Gen∣tleman, thou shalt see the person of amorous Euphues. J haue helpt your messenger fraught and furnisht hym with Letters, and so cease as I was wonted. Thyne owne if mariage chaunge not maners Euphues. These Letters dispatched and sealed vp were deliuered to Simonides, who hauyng furnished hymself of all thynges, and Supper tyme now beyng come, Euphues for that night (con∣sideryng it was Simonides farewell) kept more then ordinarie, and accompanied hym with sundrie Athenian Gentlemen,
where neither wanted Musicke nor dainties. And as tyme sodainely ouerpasseth, so winde and tyde ser∣uyng, Simonides was quickly called for, who beyng conducted to the Waterside by Euphues, gaue hym this for a farewell. Simonides, since tyme deliuereth me of the benefite of thy presence, I can not tell whether with more sorrow I might be∣mone thy departure, or with delight I might reioyce at thy trauaile: for by the one I am seuered from a frend, by the other I am satisfied in that I wishe: But how soeuer it standeth now we must parte: so that Euphues recommendes hym to Simoni∣des, desiryng Simonides to remember Euphues. Salute my freendes in Englande, and thinke of thy freend in Athens, so shall thei bid thee more welcome, and I write oftner vnto thée. Simonides with water in his eyes, preuented with the mul∣tude of his sorrowes, imbracing Euphues fast in his armes, and giuyng hym a solemne farewell, he tooke shippyng, when Eu∣phues impacient of his freends departure returned to his Lod∣gyng. How Simonides departyng from Athens towardes Englande, was entertained with a Philosophicall discourse. IT blewe a merrie gale at Sea, and Simo∣nides slept sweetly a long season, ouerpas∣syng with sounde sleapes his former sor∣rowes. For this benefite hath Nature lent to mortall men, that though neuer so ma∣ny mishappes ouerburden by daie, yet one quiet nap alaieth al the sorowes at night. But hauyng yeelded Nature her due, and raised from his Cab∣bin he mounted the Hatches beholdyng the wide Sea on eue∣ry side, and cheared by the passengers Maister and Marriners, he sat downe to dinner, where beyng satisfied with suche pro∣uision as was to be founde on Shipboard, he began to plucke vp his sprites, and accordyng to the counsaile of the Maisters
mate, eche tooke them selues to their pleasure. Onely one amongst the rest, who by his Habite seemed to be some Philosopher, stood still sometyme beholdyng the Welkin, other sometyme he would looke downe to the Waue. Whose contemplation Simonides perceiuyng, and willyng to be made partaker of his studies, interrupted hym thus. Sir, if it shall stand with your liking, to make a poore Tra∣uailer partaker of your studies, you maie in so doyng bothe sa∣tisfie your self, and also pleasure me, for that I muche desire to looke in Sciences. Truely aunswered Philesius (for so the Philosophers name was called) I am silent more then I would be (good sir) in that perhappes some here (as the most parte of the world) disdaine Artes, accomptyng the professors thereof to be either foolishe or franticke. Wherevpon, I thought it more meete to contem∣plate in silence, then to be contemned for my Philosophie. What other mens dispositions are I knowe not (quoth Si∣monides) but for my selfe, I not onely delight in Science, but also desire to knowe it, please it you therefore (the rather to a∣bridge our trauaile) to varie on some proposition, whereby ei∣ther some hidden secretes of Nature maie be opened, or some celestiall working of the superiour heauens in these inferiour creatures may be denotated. Philesius, as willing to performe as Simonides to require, saide thus: Gentle sir, my present musing at this time, is not to be included in fewe tearmes, neither may a reasonable vo∣lume comprehend my imaginations, for why, the soule passeth through more in a moment, than in many yeares may be effe∣ctually set downe. Whilome I was comparing the worlde, which is spherical and rounde (which of all proportions is the beste) nexte of the gouernement of so myraculous a firmament: thirdly, of the o∣peration the superior powers haue in these inferiour subiectes: fourthly, what affinitie may be betweene Arte and Nature: fiftly, howe Arte came first to light, and was continued by suc∣cession. Al these propositions haue I compared in thought, and now
orderly will I speake of them for your pleasure. For the worlde (accordyng to the forme) what is more excel∣lent, whose orderly reuolutions, distinguishing tymes, and pre∣fixing euentes to euery casualtie, giue occasion (to a considerat iudgement) to wonder at the motion, and reuerence the mo∣uer: the beautie whereof is suche, as in old time it hath not one∣ly been diefied for the glorie it possessed, but also accompted of by some of no small iudgement in Philosophie for a GOD: which reason contemned of those of some iudgement in that it was created, causeth that more honour is atributed to ye work∣maister then the worke. But for the opinion of the Philosophers touchyng this sub∣iect, truely wee of late iudgement, and growne more nerer to the knowledge of God, reproue all for passed positions as fri∣uelous, and confirme with Pithagoras, that God onely is wise: Men but louers of wisedome. But that wee maie measure former imaginations of Phi∣losophers, with our latter experiences in this cause, let vs con∣sider what our Auncesters haue imagined, both of the creation of the Worlde, and the beginnyng of the Creature. Thales Milesius, one of the wisemen of Greece, beginnyng to looke into the generation of all thynges. For the soule he i∣magined it immortall, for the world he concluded it to haue his beginnyng by water. Anaxagoras trustyng to his owne opinion fabled thus, that the Sunne was composed of bright Iron, that the Heauens were of stone wonderfully knit together least thei should fall. Euripides his scholer, he faines that the Moone had vallei and mountaines in her, and that the minde was the beginning of all motion: concludyng, that all creatures had their creation of Water, Fire, and Earth: wherevnto had hee added the other Eliment of Ayre, I thinke it could neither haue been dissonant from reason, nor repugnaunt to true Philosophie. For the creation of the Yearth, Archelaus will haue it of liquide water inflamed by the heate of fire, and by resolution turned into dust. Heraclitus, he thinkes all thynges to haue their originall
of fire, concluding with Aristotle, that the generation of one thing is the corruption of an other. Democritus and Leucippus with the residue of their cohe∣rents, imagining somewhat, yet concluding nothing, they re∣ferre the originall of the world to a litle nothing, and making vp a something of this Chaos, conclude it to be subiect to cor∣ruption, wherein they harped on a trueth in their errour, con∣firming the vanitie of our Metaphisickes, who wading paste their reatch, conclude somewhat, they knowe not what. In these opinions our old philosophers being conuersant, the farther they looked into the beginning of all thinges, the more they loste them selues: so that one of them a moste profounde clearke called Simonides, desired by Hiero, the ty∣rant to inquire what God was, and demaunding but one dayes respite, was in his deepest imaginations so confounded, that seeing the farther he sought the more he failed, he was in∣forced to cease the attempt, and subiect his opinion to the in∣scrutable essence of the highest. In leauing therfore these opinions of philosophers to their Maisters, we must conclude, that the worlde of nothing was made wonderfull, finished in a triuall dignitie which is moste absolute, for though in sixe dayes work the whole Masse was finished, yet in three persons the fabricature was composed, and the fabricated redeemed: so that in vnequall numbers an vnexplicable wonder was wrought, when as by the omnipo∣tencie of triuall dignitie the worlde was made, man created, man sanctified, and man redeemed, by the operation of three persons in one godhead. Some philosophers (and not vnaptly) by serious insight in this beautifull firmament haue distinguished places, apoin∣ting first a place of residence to the Maiestie, whych is they say Celum Emperium, next place they Cristalinum, the heauen of Crystall: nexte in seauen circular motions distinguishe they the planets, appointyng Saturne for the first, and so by discent to Luna, in these vnperfect numbers, and circular motions, placing al the beautie of the heauens, and the glorie of the fir∣mament.
Plato in his booke of common wealth, will needes make a common wealth of diuelles in the skies: thus ech hath his er∣rour, and euerie one a seuerall fantasie, but since we certaine∣ly knowe how the Worlde was made, and by the beholding of the same, wonder at the workemaister, since we see the im∣perfection of our Philosophers, that woulde inclose the diui∣nitie wythin limites, let vs nowe wade further, and consider of the operation of the celestiall bodies in our terrestiall sub∣iects: and herein the vanitie of many are to be wondred at, at∣tributing many things to destinie & fortune, whereas nothing passeth without the prouidence of the highest: but for the wor∣king of the higher powers: there is some similitude in this, that according to the operation of the planet, the creature is disposed, and if oppositions fal contrarious in the heauens, the contrarietie takes effect here on earth: for in truth, man is that table, wherein is included al the secretes of nature, and so are his members disposed by prouidence, that if by all circum∣spection he can conceiue his owne constitution: neither can the operation of the planets be hiden from him, nor the nouel∣ties of the earth passe his vnderstāding, in the the whole masse of nature, neither is hidden Arte concluded so secrete, that is not included in man, neither any effect in things without life, that hath not relation to the liuely substance, according as the heauens are round, so is mans head sphericall, as the vnderstā∣ding and intellectiue parte, hath congruence wyth the higher heauens, in which reason as in inscrutable power disposeth al things, and ruleth al things, the sences which are the orgaines whereby reason worketh, though in number they differ, yet in effect they varie not, ministring with equal compasse to euery member, at the spheres wyth one Sumphonia inuiron the cen∣ter. But to passe from generalities to particulars, we conclude a Jouist to be liberall minded, bounteous, faire borne to honors: a Martist quarrelsome, red haired, auster lookte, bloudie min∣ded, inconstant: a Mercurialist a lyar, a theefe, borne elo∣quent, subtil, and such like: a Saturnist, melancholy, of deepe insight, stedfast to perseuer, commonly wise, concluding ac∣cording
to the constitution wyth Aristotle, that melancholie men are moste wittie, and in like sorte of all the planets. Thus see wee a certaine hidden working, and agreement passing our reatch, which fleightly we may imagine of but in∣wardely we cannot comprehend, wherein we must condemne these vaine heades, who clyming too high beyond their reach, confound them selues in their owne deeming, taking vppon them to knowe other mens fortunes, when they bee ignorant of their owne mishappes. Such skie gessers haue we now∣adayes, that can see Jupiter in his ascendant, and cannot know them selues till they come to the discendant. But ouerslip∣ping these, I muse with what fate it falleth out, that in nota∣ble and rare blessing and cursing, we haue some foreknowlege of good or bad. A Comet pretended the birth of Christ Jesus, a Comet pre∣figured the destruction of Ierusalem, a vniuersal darkenesse co∣uered the face of the earth, at such time as our sauiour was crucified: at the creation of Eugenius the third of that name, fire from heauen deuoured Church steeples in Rome: Romu∣lus the founder of that ancient citie, was deuoured by fire from heauen. So that we see both the heauens worke toward the disposi∣tion of the creature, and manace toward the dissolution of the creature, and yet but as instruments of their diuine gouer∣nour, who by the misteries of his glorie, prefigureth his fu∣ture power. But leauing this, let vs come to the affinitie betweene Art and Nature, where we are to consider with the Philosophers what Nature is: Tullie in his Offices, hath this saying: If wee folow nature as guyde we shall neuer erre, esteeming nature for a God, by whome our chiefest good fortunes happe. Aristotles interpreters diuide nature into two formes, cal∣ling the one Natura Naturans, and the other Natura Natu∣rata, that nature that naturateth, is that which Tullie accoun∣teth for a God: that nature that is naturated, is man. If Arte be compared to that whych perfiteth all things, it should striue wyth his founder, but compared wyth his equal,
it perfiteth it, so that Nature is it which presēteth the subiect, Art, it whych perfecteth the subiect: for many naturally are borne wyth inclinations both to good and bad, Art searching narrowly into the secrets of al things, confiyrmeth according to the disposition, eyther cleansing that whych was corrupt, or confounding the euill disposed in their owne enormitie. The inclination of some by nature is to be lasciuious, the correction of the naturall errour by Arte, is to be continent: some by nature are borne cowardes, the same by Art are made constant. Zopirus by exterior signes, adiudged Socrates to be wanton and vayne headed, who, though hee confessed hys naturall in∣firmitie, yet thus he disanulled the former proposition, Essem ita si me philosophia non correxisset, I had beene so, had not phi∣losophie mended me. But as Arte profiteth Nature in some things, so Nature excelleth Arte in many thyngs, and yet haue these two so stri∣ued together, that in Protogenes table were as fayre grapes in colours, as in Natures gardens, they were in substaunce: for Nature indeede not onely affecteth the sight, but also the senses, where Art in settyng out of colours presenteth a shape wythout a substance. But so are these two knitte together, that if Nature alowe no fenell, Arte can make no fire, if Nature bestowe no cou∣lours, we can haue no paynting, and hee that will stryue to make an Asse eloquent, wil, inuita Minerua, worke great won∣ders, and yet a Crowe could cry Caesar, although Nature allo∣wed her no limites. Betwixt both Nature and Arte then, let vs put an interme∣dium, whiche is Vse: Nature first frameth, Arte teacheth, Vse maketh perfect. Arte was sought out first by naturall man, and Arte at first confirmed naturall man, yet was there a framer of the one and an inspirer of the other. Some are borne eloquent, yet Art confirmeth them in their eloquence. Some valiaūt, yet Art compasseth their exploites. What secrete soeuer Art founde out Nature ministreth it, and
what soeuer Nature hath in her bowelles included, Art hath sought it out. So that in striuyng to exceede, thei so agree in confirming, that in a learned man it is hard to saie, whether Nature or Art preuaile or profite most. But for that Nature was before Art, we will in this preferre her: yet if Art and Wisedome be Re∣latiua, I feare me Nature must loose the stirropes, and Art set in the saddle. But as touchyng our last proposition of the inuention and continuation of Artes, truth it is that the opinions of the Phi∣losophers are ambiguous in these pointes: Notwithstandyng, accordyng to my remembraunce, I will breefly passe through so many as on this sodaine my memorie will afforde me, tou∣chyng that in a Letter for breuitie whiche els would aske a vo∣lume. The first foundation of Letters is attributed by some to Mercury, by other some to Cadmas, other some Palamedes, who by the criyng of Cranes added fower letters to the Cros∣rowe: some to Simonides Melicus, other to Anticlides of Ae∣gipt, but those of latter memorie as Crinitus reporte, that in a certaine Library this Monument was left for memorie. Wise Moses first the Hebrue letters found, And wise Phaenices first prefixt the Greeke: Nicostrata the Latine letters made, And Abraham Syras the Caldean taught, And Isis she the Aegiptian letters shode, The Crosrowe of the Getes Gulfila wrote. Logicke had his first originall of Zeno: Polihimnia inuented Rhetoricke: Thalia Poetrie, Alcmenon Crotomates naturall Philosophie: Ihon of Aegipt Phisicke: Tuball Musicke, yet some father it on Appollo, Theuth Arethmeticke, Erato Geo∣mitrie: Abraham Astronomie, Zoroastes Kyng of the Bactri∣ans the Metaphisickes. As for the Manuell artes as they are not of such excellencie as the other, so labour I lefe about their originall, yet to touch them somewhat and their founders, Noe
inuented Tillage, Proteus & Acrisius Warlike Instruments, Bellecophon Horseridyng, Danaus by Shippe first shapt course into Greece: The Carthagians inuented traffique of Marchan∣dize, Phidon Chariottes, Giges Paintyng. Thus Artes had their originall by diligent inuestigation of the insight into Nature, and are continued vnto these ty∣mes, wherein we finde that as the age chaungeth, so the fashion altereth, and that Nature and Arte are at suche an atonement, that what so, either in the center of the earth may be found out to worke vpon shall be ministred: and what so, either memorie maie alowe Art shall perfect: and what is obscured by tyme, shall be made newe beyng againe renued. But for that (good Gentleman) the taske I prefixed is fini∣shed, the Sunne alreadie settled in the West perswades vs to sleapyng, if it please you we will here make an end, beseeching you to beare with a Scholers rudenesse, who accordyng to the Talent his studies haue afforded hym, hath discoursed thus long to doe you pleasure. Simonides greatly pleased with this clearkly discourse, con∣cluded thus: truly Philesius, I knowe not whether I should more prayse thee for thy learnyng, or commend thee for thyne eloquence, the one is so singular, the other so sufficient: but my conclusion is (for that I would be loath to be troublesome) that thou hast deserued the name of a Philosopher, wyshing af∣ter thy repose, to be made stil partaker of thy purposes. In such like commendations, Simonides discoursing wyth Phile∣sius was finally interrupted thus: To apply prayse to those that alow it not, is to minister water to increase flame, I had rather be in deede, than to bee praysed in word, but let vs slip ouer these vnnecessarie praises, and to morrowe we wil fall to some other such discourse. They both beyng agreede, betooke them selues to their ca∣bins, where I leaue them to their rest, til on the morrow at the Sunne, Philesius not accustomed to sleepe excessiuely tooke the hatches, and calling Simonides vp, whome he founde faste a sleepe, hee merily in this sort iested with hym. It seemeth by your wakefulnesse, that you haue studied A∣stronomie
too little, or affected slouthfulnesse too much, that you can suffer the goodliest comforter of the world to shine vp∣on you, and you sleeping soundly, scarce to salute hym. I cannot tell by what benefite it falleth out Philesius {quod} Si∣monides, but so sweete thys nights sleepe hath beene to me, as all my houres forepassed (in comparison of this) seemeth but a dreame. And good reason (sayd Philesius) for seeing your dayes ex∣ercise was not vaine, it must needes followe you shoulde sleepe sounde, for the fantasie is neuer troubled wyth dreaming, but when the bodie and mind by day haue employed themselues, in practiue exercise, or excessiue diet. Yes by your leaue (said Simonides) some Dreames there be that not onely be fortune in the temperatest bodies, but also bee foretokens of some fortune to come. Herein I agrée with you (saied Philesius) but these are in an other kinde then those Dreames we talke of: for although thei maie borowe the name of a Dreame, yet in nature they are re∣uelations: For in Dreames there are distinctions bothe aloted by the Poetes, and alowed by the Philosophers, attributyng one to men, the other to beastes: for the phantasie, it worketh on insensible thynges, and in dreamyng, not onely by the power of the highest a certaine inwarde knowledge of the immortali∣tie of the soule is gathered, but also certaine forewarninges ei∣ther of good or ill are prefigured. For suche Dreames as haue their originall only of the disposition of phantasie, and the com∣plexion and operation of humours, they as incident to bruite beastes neede little discourse. For suche as proceede of the af∣fectes of the mynde, which troubled with that it wrought vpon by daie, now hath operation and workyng of it by night, that I leaue to thy consideration, wishyng thee but to obserue the qualitie of the cause and the order of the workyng. For those Dreames that in deede haue Deuinitie in them, in whiche hidden secrete misteries be presented, of them I will (for pleasures sake) prefixe thee some example, and afterward I will betake my self to my priuate contemplation. Genadius of Carthage, a man deepely seene in the Arte of
medicine, doubtyng of the immortalitie of the soule, estee∣ming it to perish with the bodie, beholding in his sleepe at two seuerall times, a yong man standyng before hym, who pre∣sented him wyth the portrature of a faire citie, and the nexte night returnyng vnto him, he demaunded of the phisition if he knew him, who aunswered, that he knew him, and forgate not his dreame, and demaunded by the same yong man agayne, where his bodie was, hee aunswered in his bed, yet confoun∣ded with the strangenesse of his knowledge, that sleepyng verie soundly, he coulde yet make relation of the state of his bodie, by these meanes gatheryng it was the workyng of his soule, he reuoked his errour, and what by long studie hee coulde not compasse, by a little dreame he founde out, and was throughly confirmed, that the soule was immortall. Cirill reporteth this dreame to haue fortuned to hym selfe, beyng in his bed, and after he had finished his prayers, that hee was fallen asleepe, it seemed vnto him, that he felt an vnmea∣surable and horrible stench, whych the sense not admittyng, at last, the dead bodie of his owne kinsman called Rufus appea∣red vnto hym loaden and chained with greate iron shackles, vomityng out of his mouth, fierie flames, and sendyng from out all partes of his bodie innumerable sparkles, and tokens of the inwarde fire that was kindled wythin his breast, whome thus beholdyng wyth intollerable feare and compassion of minde, he at laste with tremblyng voice as minister of hys feareful heart, demaunded of hym thus: O Rufus, how falleth it out that thou liuyng as thou diddest in most blessed behaui∣our accompted of for the integritie of thy life of all men, and shouldest bee thus tormented. Alas Cirillus aunswered Rufus, thou art deceiued, for these plagues are laied vppon mee onely for the loosnesse of my life, for my leude liuyng, my Dieyng and vnlawfull Ga∣myng, hath brought me to bee punished with so many horrible plagues. With these wordes the Vision auoyded, and Cirillus with feare awakyng, reportes this wonder. Thus you may see (Gentleman) that the mynde is affected
when the bodie sleapeth, and wonders are opened in dreames, to confirme wakyng men in vertues. Some in dreames receiue inspirations of knowledge as Aeschilus did, who tendyng his fathers vines beyng a childe, in a dreame was warned by Bacchus, to write tragedies, who makyng proofe of his cunnyng beyng waked, founde his abi∣litie to performe indeede, that whych before hee had imagined but in dreame. And for that I haue priuate studies to applie, I am forced to end abruptly, wherevpon, leauyng you to your pleasures good Gentleman) I take my leaue, and thus with a Philoso∣phicall becke Philesius departed to his Cabbin, and Simonides continued his musing of the accidentes forepast, and wonde∣ryng at the effectes of learnyng, he brake into these tearmes. O vnsearchable secrete of Philosophie, by whiche Art first was knowne, Nature sought into, Weales publique begun, common Weales gouerned. How happie are thei that haue the possession of thee? How blinded in errour are those that are without thee? O blessed Euphues, who seyng the sweete of stu∣dies, hast refrained to bee worldly and attained to bee happie. How fortunate is that soule whiche is partaker of the secretes of the Gods, and by learnyng and serious studie hath compre∣hended the deuinitie of it self? What booteth perfections of the bodie, when the mynd is vnperfect. For beautie, who doubteth but that other creatures excell men: but it is wisedome onely that beautifieth. Oh vnhappie Simonides that left Ciuill for Loue and not for Learnyng. From this tyme forthe duryng the tyme thei were on the Sea, Simonides onely solicited hymself in the company of Philesius, till the Maister of the Ship comfortyng his Pas∣sengers tolde them that thei were vpon the Coast, and that he doubted not but shortly he should see Sandwiche: These newes made the companie frolicke, and as tyme bringeth all thynges to end, so after eight weekes sailyng thei attained the harbour: wherevpon Simonides beyng set a Shore with Philesius in his companie, he feasted hymself and the Philosopher (beyng both ouerwearied at the Sea) with suche dainties as the Towne
could presently afforde them. Philesius perceiuyng the hast Simonides made on his Iour∣ney, he hymself not yet prepared to beare hym companie, gaue hym this freendly farewell. Noble Spanyard, as thy affection is great to learnyng, so I praie thee make thy knowledge aunswerable to thy desire, and when opertunitie shall serue thee to fall to thy studies, I beseeche thee forget not to search Philosophie: for findyng her she will feede thee. The Gods prosper thee in thy trauailes and me in my studies, and for that I see thou hast haste on thy waie, I will no longer trouble thee, but bid thee hartely fare∣well. Simonides giuyng hym freendly thankes, presently tooke order for the conueying of his necessaries to London, and being mounted on Horsebacke, by conuenient Iourneyes he came to the Citie. ¶ How Simonides commyng to London, was friendly entertained by Philautus. SIMONIDES hauyng recouered London (after some inquirie) he found out the house of Philautus, to whom when he had deliuered his Letters, was entertai∣ned by the Jtalian in these freendly tear∣mes. Gentleman, if my freends recommen∣dations were not, your owne want of familiaritie should per∣swade me to pleasure you in what I could, but when Euphues presentes you as a freende to Philautus, doubt not but the best curtesie in England (that lieth in my poore) shal be at your com∣maund if it please you to imploye me: meane while, you shall if you please take a poore lodgyng with me, whiche though not so decently furnished as beseemeth your honour, yet so frendly welcome are you, as that by it onely, I doubt not but of curte∣sie you will beare with the coursnesse.
After Simonides had giuen hym hartie thankes, he was con∣ducted by Philautus to his wife, recommending the straunger vnto her in these tearmes. My vyolet, see how fauourable our freende Euphues is to vs, who though he can not in person come and see vs, yet hath presented vs with a courteous yong Gentleman to beare vs companie. And he may assure himself of his welcome into England (said Mistris Fraunces) wherefore, the hartie affections the Ladies beare our Athenian freend, he shall not be long without a Mi∣stris. Madame (aunswered Simonides) neither knowe I how to recompence your fauour, nor how to requite your curtesies, onely this well I wot, that if for Euphues sake Simonides finde fauourable Ladies in England, he shall. Naie forth saied Ma∣dame Fraunces, for I feare me I haue wrong where it biteth. And it maie be so my vyolet (said Philautus) for this is yong Euphues, or Euphues Letters are faultie. Would God sir (saied Simonides) I were Euphues in deed, or partaker of Euphues vertues, and as for the passion whiche you Madame seeme to catche holde on, if I seeme a Sainct, I doubt not I shall scape the Deuill, and if I continue constant to that Shrine whiche so often I haue sacrificed to, my hope is in the end, to gaine the high Priesthood for my good deuotion. As for the faire Ladies in Englande, I will doe them honour, but for my seruice, as it was vowed before, so shall it continue hereafter. And if your perfection be suche as you make shewe of (said Mistris Fraunces) I will not doubt but to cannonise you for your constancie, and also preferre you as one that is praise wor∣thie, but I feare me there will suche Sunnes shine here in En∣gland, that your Moone will be extinguished els where. It maie bee your Sunnes want light here in Englande, or myne shines to faire in Ciuill (saied Simonides) or it maie bee I am either blinde in iudging colours, or beetle headed in behol∣dyng beautie. And blinde you maie be if a Louer (saied Ladie Fraunces)
or els Loue staines in other colours in Spaine then in England. If I bee blinde I would not see (saied Simonides) and with these wordes Philautus brake of their purpose, and preasyng Simonides hande in his, saied thus. Gentle sir, you maie see the readie wittes of our Ladies, who can take a tale at rebound, and fit fansies as thei please. Herein are they more to be wondered at for their wisedome (saied Simonides) who with quicke capacitie can comprehende euery thyng, and with wittie conclusions can finishe as they please. In these and suche like deuises thei passed the tyme till sup∣per was serued in, where neither delicates were wantyng, nei∣ther varietie of Musicke, nor delectable discourse, so that Si∣monides astonied at the braue behauiour of the Ladies, the sun∣drie dainties of their repast, and the sweete harmonie of the Musicke, was reuiued by Ladie Fraunces thus. It seemeth courteous Gentleman, that you haue certaine ceremonies to performe you sit so sadly, I am sorry amongst so many of our poore pleasures, no one of them will wring one smile from your heauie countenaunce. Truely (saied Simonides) you are mistaken, for neither am I so holy as to meditate to muche, nor in so pleasaunt moode, to laughe at euery conceite, if ought amase me, it is rather the excellencie of that I beholde, then the cogitation of that which I thought not of. My thought is the lesse sir (saied she) and your welcome the more, but how like you Englande saied Madame Fraunces. As I should doe Ladie (saied Simonides) it is pleasaunt in Climat, populus in Cities, plenteous in dainties, storde with braue personages, and full of faire women. Not so faire as in Ciuill, saied Ladie Fraunces, it maie be in myne opinion (saied Simonides) not hauyng as yet seene but little, but if hereafter I light of a more faire prospect, I will not doubt Madame to make you priuie to my opinion, meane while, I conceiue this, if al be as faire as the Mistris of this house, no maruell though Italians leaue Naples to dwell at London. By this tyme the Table was taken awaie, and euery Gen∣tleman
straunger had his welcome, and as the custome of the Countrey is after Supper, thei betooke themselues to disport eche as fitted his owne fansie. Amongst the rest, the Mistris of the house takyng Simonides by the hand, and ioynyng vnto him other Gentlemen and Ladies of the companie, saied thus. No∣ble Simonides, as this Countrey guise of disporte is after their repast to reason, so will I acquaint you now with the orders, because that findyng your capacitie to be so execellent as it is, I maie imploye you to be a moderator, amongst suche vnexpe∣rienced reasons as we poore Ladies be. If you reason no worse Madame (saied Simonides) then he∣therto yet you haue discoursed, I thinke I shall haue greater reason to giue eare and bee silent, then enterruptyng a sweete tale with a sower censure, shall rather shame my self then de∣light the companie. You saie well sir (saied the Ladie) yet you maie not wring out with this wyle, wherefore Gentlemen, I praie let me in∣treate you, to enterprise a discourse, for on my word I haue fit∣ted you with a conuenient moderater. At her request thei all condescended, among the whiche a∣comely yong Gentleman called Siluius began thus. Since you haue begun (Madame) to enterprise, and to ap∣point him that shall dispose, maie it please you to order how the disputation shal passe, and then with more conformitie we may goe forwarde. Bee it so Siluius (saied Madame Fraunces) and accordyng as you intimat you shall first reason with Mistris Claudia, Fa∣uellus with Secrobia, and Furnelius with me. As for hym that shall conclude, you knowe who is enioy∣ned Segnior Simonides, vpon this conclusion, we all are atten∣tiue Segnior Siluius: And I will not bee long silent, saide hee, wherevpon turnyng himselfe wyth a curteous regard toward Maistresse Claudia, he beganne thus: There is a punishment (faire Maistresse Claudia) amongst the Indians, that by the drinckyng of a bitter poyson, the body in sleepe, is so tormented wyth horrible visions, that wakyng it doth destroy and subuert it selfe, as in those tortures, so in
these attempts, it is not onely a punishment prefixed to talke against loue, for commonly the moste contemners are subiect to this mischiefe, that tastyng their fill of fancie, they not on∣lie in nights dreames beholde their dayes sorrow, but also by daye discontinu their wakyng happinesse, whiche makes me now, so to prefixe limites to my arguing, that beyng loath to commit an errour, yet am not I willyng to commende too much, wherevppon, if it please you, wee will reason whether beautie be more commendable in a base borne creature, than in hir that is sprong of noble parentage: and for that I wil leaue you that which belongeth to your selfe, beyng descended of ho∣nourable parentes: I meane to maintayne this, that the ex∣cellencie of beautie is more commendable in hir that is sprong by progenie of small regarde, than in hir that is beautifull and enriched with many titles of honour. My reasons be these, first nature is emploid more strange∣ly than minde can conceiue, when on thistles shee grafteth ro∣ses, or on the hurtfull hemlocke, the hurtlesse hearbgrace, in the deformed wombe, a perfect substance, when grose humors, homely feedyng, and disordered diet, worke both in actiue and passiue substances, if there were not more than a supernatural workyng, we muste conclude, that the female shoulde be sub∣iect to manie defaults, and humours eyther abandonyng or defaulting in Nature, the babe shoulde be either a monster or changelyng in proportion: so that, by howe muche the more the rare effects of Nature are to bee wondred at, by so muche the wonderfull benefites of beautie are to be commended. And with some hidden reason, the powers bestow these be∣nefites on pouertie, that where they haue not ministred to it in worldly honours, they forget not to recompence in seemely similitudes: so that it muste be concluded, that Nature more strangely worketh in vnnoble than in noble, when from so base substances, so sweete a perfection is gathered. So that I feare me, if there were the like custome in England, as was at Elida, that shee that was the beautifullest, should bee crowned in re∣garde of honour, I doubt not but our base borne beautifull, might sacrifice a target to Minerua, when our brauest courti∣ers,
and Ladies of greatest honour, shoulde be but ministrs to accomplishe the sacrifice. And it would so fall out, that the faire maidens of Tenidos, should carrie away the bucklers, when our beautifull damo∣sells of Troy were to be depriued of their honour they so striue for. But to make my reasons more forcible, I muste inferre this, what so a noble minde beautified wyth all titles of honor desireth, must be concluded to be both rare and wonderful, but the beautie of hir that is borne but of vnnoble parēts, hath sub∣dued mightie Emperours, and therefore more to be maruailed at. For you faire damosells, the abundance of your wealth, the promotions of your fathers, the expectation of worldly plea∣sure makes you to be sought after, and to bee sued to, when as they hauyng none of these possibilities to preferre them, are as curteously intreated as your selues, and more accompted of, than many of you. It was a lawe amongst the Lacedemonians, that who in battell had gained victorie, shoulde in the presence of the king be crowned with garlands of honor, wherevpon noble Iudge, I must now request you, that seeing I haue concluded so vn∣doubtedly, I may be rewarded wyth honour accordingly. Maistresse Claudia conceiuyng his conclusion, chopte him this aunswere, who triumphs before the victorie, may sooner carrie a fagot for his penaunce than weare a garlande for his honour. Stichicus might striue with Hercules in sleight matter of pleasure, but if he chalenge the combat, he might haue a cold comfort in his proceedynges. So Signior Siluius it will fare with you, who in matters of pleasure like the Lambe maie plaie with the Lyon, but if you stretche past your compasse, you maie happe to haue a clindge for your labour, neither ought you to claime the rewarde of victorie, since with most certaine demonstration I will defend, and with more probabilitie I wil conclude, that beautie in the Noble is more commendable, then in those of obscure name it is praise worthie. In good sooth tell me (Signior Siluius) is not
the Sunne more beautifull in the Firmament, when the ob∣scuritie of the cloudes defaceth it not, than when it is ouersha∣dowed wyth darkenesse: is not the delectable sent of the Rose more commendable, when it is mixed with his companions in Nature, than ouerpressed with vnsauorie smelles, I see not but that the moone is more faire amidst the glimsing starres, than amongest the shrowdes of darkenesse, and affects the eie sight with more pleasure, and the trauailer with greater com∣forte. Place beautie in an honourable personage, and it hath affi∣nitie with an honourable minde, which maketh it so much the more to be wondred at: As for the matching beautie in a base personage, it is to put pearles in a swines nostrels, to pricke floures in a filthie donghill, or to dresse an Asse in a Lyons skinne. I can bring you many that were noblie borne, that were ex∣quisite in all professions, but for them that are obscure in byrth, neuer founde I anie, neither if I did would I beleeue it. A beautifull noble woman brought vp in vertuous demea∣ner is a president to those that folow after, who with emulatiō will contend to exceede or match hir at the least. But when a beautifull in noble shall fortune by wonderfull destinies to growe to great perfection, what imitation shal wee finde or succession amongst these obscure maidens. No Segnior Siluius. I conclude, and you must confesse, that my reasons are the stronger, and for that I wil not be tedious, I leaue the reste to the discretion of the Iudge. The whole companie alowing this methodicall contenti∣on, after some pawse, were attentiue to heare the second dis∣putation, when as Fauellus a noble Gentleman, and one well nurtured, turned to Secrbia, and saide thus: Madame, since wee twoo must enter disputation, I would so fitte you, that eche might be partaker of the pleasure of the subiect, and the eloquent deliuerie of your discourse, where∣vppon, if you please, we will argue thus: if in choice of hus∣bandes, you were to be limited betweene twoo personages,
whether would you alow of the Souldior for your bedfellow, or the Courtier for your husband? Truly Fauellus (said Secrobia) I alow wel of the Souldior, but I must yeelde the prise to the Courtier. And I Madame (saide Fauellus) wil prooue the Souldiour more worthie to be alowed of, and a more meete man to be be∣loued, and this not without reason: firste, for personage most commonly he is as perfect as the beste, for bedde pleasures, Idoubte not as actiue as the moste, in discourse, as de∣lectable, in loue as stedefast, his affections are not so vari∣ous as the Courtiers, for that his life is not so lasciuious, if thine honour be depraued, he wil reuenge it, if thou be subiect to any imperfection, he will beare with it, for it muste needes folow, that he who winketh at so many outrages in his Soul¦dior, wil not be much incensed with a womans naturall fragi∣litie: their eies are chaste in all places. But where they loue, their actions more honourable when they remember them of their beloued. Alexander that noble Macedon, though he had in his sub∣iection the wife of Darius and his beautifull daughters, hee woulde not violate them, whereas I feare mee if a Courtier were so faire offered, he woulde haue made one of them, sing a fa burthen while he were descanting a loft. A souldiour perhaps may bee accompted bloudie minded, and therfore not mete for a delicate damosels bed, but in my o∣pinion it were better to marrie a man than a meacocke, for the Souldiour offereth no rigour but to his enimie, if hee be displeased, it is with such as enuie the felicitie of his Mistris: the Courtier perhaps shutes it out in better colours, but the Souldiour hauing no fine phrases to please humours, laieth it on with plaine truthe, whiche is the plea of him that in loue wil prooue most constant. Whereupon I must conclude (mistris Secrobia) that either you must proue affectionate in your choice, or peruerse in reso∣lution, makyng election of the worser and leauinge the better, and on this conclusion I refer my self to iudgment. And to this conclusion I shape this aunswer (saied Secrobia)
though you haue tied me within limites of election (Signior Fauellus) yet I will susspend my resolut iudgment, and for that you shall not thinke by your reason thus to win the goole, thus much for the courtier. Who so in all actions most fitteth wonens fantasies. is most conuenient to be alowed, but Courtiers are thei that most con: ueniently satisfie faire Ladies likynges, and therefore metest to be had in wedlocke. For the truth is so, that whereas faire demoseles are deligh∣ted with seamlinesse, modest pleasure, with like courtly behaui∣ours: such thinges are most agreable to their delicate humours, and therefore it cannot bee but that a Courtiour must bee ad∣mitted who is the onely man for this purpose to furnish them in that thei looke for. The Courtiour with seamly parsonage, with honourable behauiour, with philed phrases, with sweet musicke, and with twentie amarous deuices will delude the time so pretely, that we Laidies can not imagine them, but to be the onely mini∣sters to procure our pleasure. In the Soldiour, what resteth there either to be wondreth at or wished for that the Courtiour wanteth, in the Courtiour, is there any thing missyng in whiche he exceedeth not the Sol∣diour, the Courtiour is as good a horseman, as practised a man at armes, as valiaunt to defend his mistris, yea more resolute in beauties cause, they stand on euery light tearme of honour, not sufferyng the least staine to take hould of their gentrie. The Soldiour is fed withe murthers, delighted in blodshed, the memorie of whose massakers, would make the memorie of his pleasures most loothsome. And Signior Fauellus, that con∣tenencie whiche you impute to Soldiours, aledging the exam∣ple of Alexander that would not regarde the beautie of Darius wife & daughters, imagiyyng thereby the chastitie of Soldiors myndes, I can not by this excuse your grose imagination, but doe rather thinke Soldiours to be so betle blinded that thei are not able to distreye the perfection of beautie: or els composed of so base a substaunce not to estem of so rare a benifit, as hath mad the wisest to stoupe.
The Courtiour continueth in one compsse, that is alwaies constant, redie at a becke for all seruice: the Soldiour when his mistris should haue most nede of him, is wandryng I knowe not where, and returneth I can not tell when. The Courtiour pretermitteth not a daie without varietie of delight, lyberall he is in expence, bountifull to her he honour∣eth, he respecteth not either this occasion of conquest, or that bootie to inriche him, but acountes his chefest felicitie in the at∣tainment of beautie, and to doe faire Ladies seruice, and should not thei (thinke you) be to vnkynde, that would forget the dili∣gence of so louing Gentlemen. Truely Fauellus I must conclude my fancie with faire Lai∣dies opinions (for I take my self sometimes to be one of their preuie counsaile) that Soldiours are more fitter for the feilde, then for the feilde bed: more meter for a massacre, then for a ma∣riage: And the Courtiour to be the onely necessarie man, that fitteth to worke a faire Ladies pleasure. If this be not true, I referr me to the iust determination of this gentleman our iudg. All the companie laughed hartely at this mery conclusion, till such tyme as madame Eraunces discoursed thus. Sith the matter is sorted out thus farr (gentle Furnelius) I will now streine curtisie with you and inuert the order, and because my memorie is but brittle, I will begin the soner least I forget the latter. Your profession (I dout not) is such good sir, as you which haue practised the profit thereof so long, are not now to seeke how to praise it, whereupon at this present, I meane to argue thus. Whether the Lawyer or the Phisition be more commen∣dable in a state, I will defend the Lawyer, for you as beeyng a Phisition by profession, you maie the better defend since you are the more practised. The professer of the law, if he had naught els to commend hym, the verie name it self would make it praise worthy, for by the lawes good disciplines are prescribed, the state gouerned, and all policies to the maintenaunce of peace, both begun, con∣tinued and ended. The Lawyer, knowyng the punishment of all errours, and
findyng him self to be a president in all good demeaner, so orde∣reth him self as when he but passeth the streates as Cato Censer did, all Rome refraineth idlenesse and becommeth well ocupied, he purgeth the state of suspitious inconueniences, he prescribeth in the Commenwealth such preuentions as that an errour now spronge vp can neither take head nor be contenued, no not in those of great countenaunce the professer of the law hath relati∣on to leade him, conscience to direct him, iustice to counsell him, honour to reward him. In his life he is vertuous, in his coun∣sailes constant, in his iudgementes vpright, in his pleadynges vncorrupte, in conclusion, he is the onely necessarie membre in a state, by whom the Noble are counsailed, the subiect kept in awe, and the truth is, that the Common wealth is vnhappie, whereas the Lawyer hath not both preferment by his practise, and poure to reproue what he misliketh. It was a Lawyer (yea and a learned practiser of the science Apius Claudius) who when the whole senate and state hunge in susspence by the approch of the enimie, not onely counsailed that whiche was profitable, but also preferred those preceptes which were honourable for his cuntrie: neither yet knew I any regi∣ment fortunate, where either the Prince was self opinionatiue not respectyng lawe or the subiect so dissolute that he regarded not the Lawyer. As for you Docter Furnelias, if your potions be wholsome, thei are as perlions to the Soule as thei are pro∣fitable for the bodie, for your pacient beyng once restored to health, he is made prone to put in practise euery kynd of inor∣mitie: againe, your medicine is commodious but to one perti∣culer person, but where one good Axiome passeth from a Lawyer, it is not a sole pleasure, but in truth it is publiquely commodions If then, by the dignitie practise and profit, the law as most commendable, the professer of force must not faile of prehe∣minence, whom since I haue concluded for a more necessary person, I doubt not but the iudge will determine, that in the ate he is most profitable. Here ceased Ladie Fraunces when thus the graue Docter began his discourse.
Madam perhappes (as commonly amongst Ladies it fal∣leth out) your Ladishipe rather deameth vppon affection then iudgement, whiche makethe you so parcially to thinke of the Lawyer, and so iudicially to condemne the Phisition, but if a burnyng feeuour as now had handfast of your bodie, I fere me you would rather sacrifice to Asculapius, then shake handes with Iustinian, perswaded by profe & experience in this that a medicine can alay that in the body which moral preceptes cā ne∣uer aswage, and that the Phisition in extreamitie of sicknes is your Godes good, where nowe in your discourse he is smally accounted of. As man is made but of Soule and bodie, so nexte the Soule the health of the bodie is to be preserued before worldly pelf, and as richesse are but slaues to minister to the bodies want, so the greatest commendation that may be giuen to a Lawyer is but in iustice to giue euery one his owne, yet this farre vncomper∣able to the Phisition, that giueth euerie one his health. But admit what you haue saied to be true, that the Lawyer is to be thought worthy the commendation you haue giuen him, yet the Phisition is he that continueth him his health, and then I doubt not but you will conclude, that the perfiter is more wor∣thy then the perfited, and that he that ministreth perfection to the Lawyer, is of more excelencie then the Lawyer. If sick∣nes should take hold on your most vpright iusticer, by whom (as you conclude) the whole state is releaued by, I praie you then who is sent for, is not the Phisition sued vnto, then runnes this Ladie for that preseruatiue, now for that preparatiue, againe for this purgation, and should not the humour by Phi∣sicke be expelled, our Lawyer might bid goodnight to his frendes, is it not then true that the Phisition is to be preferred when he not onely is a good membre in a Commonwealth, but also continueth in good health the staies and vpholders of the state. If the memorie be ill, phisicke will recouer it: if the bodie be consumed, a medicine will helpe it: if beautie be de∣caied, phisicke will restore it: and madame, can you find in hart to speake ill of so necessary members. He that must be a Phisi¦tion & a maister in his science, must be able to search into the na∣ture
of the Heauens, the course of the Planetes, the distintiō of tymes, the operations of complextions whereas to be a suffici∣ent Lawyer requireth no great art, but a discrete iudgment, a good memorie, with a fewe principles, so that the conclusions of law maie be comprehended in 20 yeares limet, where to be a good Phisition requireth Nestors yeares. Yea, madam, for that you shall know the Phisition is as profitable and as expert in state as any others, doe but marke this, that in the tyme of Eugenus the thirde, at a general coun∣saill, a Phisition interteinynge the whole rablement of pro∣found Philosophers of Asia, and at that sityng, not onely aun∣swered them to their depest opositions, but also confounded them in their owne groundes, and not without reason, where∣as he that perfiteth the memoryes of others can bee, without the same perfection by which he worketh. Truly faire Ladies if you were examined vppon your cons∣ciences, how many of you would proue kind pacientes to your Phisitions, and confesse that vnlesse our medicines had sharp∣ly alaied some humours would haue proued ouer lawlesse, nei∣ther able to be corrected with a common Lawyers cautions, although in your Ladishippes opinion, now thei must haue the preheminence. But good madame since we haue referred all to an arbiter and iudge, I request you suspend your iudgement and leaue it to his discretion, who beyng a straunger and hauing in trauell gathered many experiences, will not faile to conclude accor∣dyng to discretion, and preferre the person accordyng as his desertes inable him. Why saied madam Fraunces, Signior Simonides, the whole resteth in you, who to conclude this our nightes disport, are onely to furnish vs of a iudgment touchyng all our doubtes. And I madame accordyng to the tenuite of my iudgment, will fulfill what you haue inioyned me, although I am bound in these causes to some extreamyties. Since you Signior Siluius confirme a wonder, Mistris Claudia a meruell, beautie as I esteame (faire Ladies) as it was first made incomprehensible by reason of excelencie, so is
it not bestowed but vppon rare personages: for nature in the first composition of all creatures, proportioned the beautifull in such forme, as if Ethinick poetes may preuaile to perswade, it not onely bewitcheth the Godes, but also intangleth the cre∣atures, so that where the benifit of beauty is imploied, ther bi∣cause the person is to be wondered at the powers, by hidden se∣cresie adequat the delight of the one, with the perfection of ho∣nour, not vouchsafing beautifull brightnesse but on the sunne, nor faire face but on an honourable personag, willyng on this to contenue their wonted equalitie, who bestow all graces a∣like, not sufferyng beautie to dround honour, nor honour to ex∣cede beautie, so that when nature bendeth at my tyme to the baser, it is but to shew that she can of infamous make noble, and of base borne beautiful yet notwithstanding, as the Pain∣ter generally bestowith all his best coullers on the sweetest si∣mulytudes, so nature most commonly bestoweth her rarest per¦fections on the roiallest substaunce, immitatynge herein the course of the world, where there is haboundaunce, there more shall be bestowed, and he that is pressed with penurie, must stil be contented to bide the penaunce. So that Signior Siluius, herein I must depriue you of that you wishe for, in that you commende that whiche onely is but probably true, where this Gentlewoman hauyng experience in these dispositions, hath iudicially concluded, leauyng me a bad scipher to finishe vp her sentence. But for you Signior Fauellus, who hath entered into the na∣ture of deuine creatures, bindyng womens likynges within limites, I must vse you and your resolutions as the Anthro∣pophagie vse their enemies, who fat them then most excessiuely, when thei entende to murther them cruelly, so alowyng you a little scope to confirme the plausibilitie of your witte, I must with the same reasons disswade by which you confirme, so bea∣tyng you with your owne rodde, and maisteryng you in your owne conclusions, Mistris Serobia must haue the day and you the disaster. You growe in commendation of Soldiours, in whom what note you but constauncie (and that is a vertue) in whom what
alowe you but valewe, (and that placed as it ought to bee is a black swane) yet who fitteth the faire Cambrick with a black staine, and the sweete Amber with the rancke Mandrake, shall find he hath but acquainted an Asse with eloquence, & a Plow man with Philosophie. Are Soldiours constaunt (Fauellus) it is then in vnconstan∣cie? Are Soldiours valiaunt (Fauellus) it is then in extreami∣ties, and I thinke who neuer doeth well before he be vrged, his well doyng is not praise worthie, for where the action is not freely enterprised, though the successe be neuer so fortunate, the vnwillyng attempt concludes an vnworthie exigent. It is a Soldiour that you would make a Ladies maister, and faire Damoselles vouchsafe not to accept so base fellowes to bee their seruauntes, so then in myne opinion wee must con∣clude, that he that will prefixe raines to womens fantasies, and would prescribe them limites to keepe them within compasse, must both bid the repulse of his vniust comparison, and be dis∣placed of Iudgement when he seekes to conclude that whiche is infinite. A Courtier is a collop of pleasure, whiche was first bred to feede Ladies with varietie, and to sucke the Marrowe of the youth, and to determine the pleasures of their age. A Soldiour is no doubt of it reserued to an ende, yet that exigent so sequesters them from any libertie of likyng, that he who but carries the name for his after commoditie, must bee glad of the repulse for his vniust title. So that now Fauellus, I must conclude in beauties cause, as vniust tyrauntes in their owne ouerweanyng, Stat pro ra∣tione voluntas, Beauties alowance standes for reason: And if I haue not concluded well faire Ladies be you Iudge. But Madem Frunces, as you inuented the order, so now must I alter my sentence, and as your conclusions were most serious. so will I more seuerely conclude of your censure. You as naturally inclined to maintain a Commonwealth (in that you are a necessary membre to multiplie) giue phe∣minence to the law maker, and not without reason. First he contenueth and increaseth peace, prescribeth and
performeth good lawes, ye so ordereth all thinges, that no thinges can be lawlesse that is within his reche, nor any thing vnlookt to where he maie haue libertie. But Docter Furneli∣us, who can descant on all natures, in colouryng the errours of the Lawyer, ciphereth out his owne perfections, he will not tell how the Lawyer is a peny Father, how a maintainer of contencions, how like to Aesopes Rite, who while the mouse and the Froge stroue togither for suprimecie in the Mrshe, he denoured them both, and made the soure of their contention the swet of his praie, But he wisely reputes him praise, by that meanes to im∣ploie the excellency of his practise, for (saieth he) if the Law∣yer bee commodious then he that contenueth this commodity must of force be accounted more profitable. But if Doctor Furnelius, should remember, that by the o∣peration of his potions, the euil are enabled to more vnlawful practises, and the Lawier being by him recouered, is lefte to folow his wonted exercise, to maintaine strife and contention in a state, for the verie brables and quarrelsome debates that are had amongst fooles, is the onelie credite, reputation, and maintenance of the Lawyer: And therfore (Madame Fraun∣ces, not to dissemble with you, who hath said so well for them, and not to flatter Maister Doctor, who hath aleadged so much in his owne behalfe, I must conclude the Phisition to bee the most profitable member in a common wealth, for that he many times with his medicines killeth the Lawier, who, while hee liued in health, cousins the poore comminaltie of their coine, with his crafte. So now my faire Ladies, and good Gentlemen the debate may cease: and if it shall please you to sleepe vpon my verdite, if to morrow you shall not like it, you may reuerse it with a writ of errour, so you put in good sureties: And we will not trouble the Iudge wyth common baile (saide Madam Fraun∣ces) in so serious a cause: yea but Madame (said Simonides) I must put you to your booke othe before I admitte you: As for that conclusion (said Ladie Fraunccs) since it lieth on your curtesie to esteeme, I doubt not but you will forbeare if you
carrie a good opinion Segnior Simonides, With these merie greetings, the assemblie beyng broken vp, eche betooke themselues to their lodging, leauing Simoni∣des to the curtesie of Philautus and his violet, who conducted him to his chamber, and lefte him to his nightes rest after his long trauaile. He thus in a strange soile, and amongst strange people, was troubled with as strange imaginations, first with the felicitie of the Ilande, next of the opulencie of the inhabitants, then of the bountie of their repast, thinking in himselfe, that Euphues praise might wel perswade so farre, and that England was on∣lie fortunate, beyng so fruitful in all blessings. And sleepyng on these imaginations, on the morrowe at conuenient time, he was conducted by Philautus vnto the English court, where he not onelie receiued a freendly Bein Ʋenu of Surius, but also a curteous salutation of Madam Ca∣milla. And here it were a wonder to write, how his imaginations wrought, comparyng Euphues reports, with his own proofes, there sawe he as great brauerie as might be, as much beauty as was requisite, ech subiect so sumptuous, that rauished with the imagination of the inferiour, he beganne euen then to me∣ditate what might be in the superior, but when the Princesse Elizabeth presented hir selfe, in whom findyng austere seeme∣linesse befittyng a Princesse, curteous affabilitie to entertaine freends, incomparable beautie to allure an enimie: admirable chastitie against all assaultes of fancies, constant resolutions in wortthy attemptes, inestimable dowers of learnyng with∣out anie blemish of arrogancie: he concluded as the Paynter did of Ʋenus proportion, that since these verie Principia of hir vertues were vnspeakeable, it were not possible to cyphre out the true similitudes of hir perfections, nor resemble that by shadowes, which relied vpon a more than heauenly constel∣lation. Thus fared it with Simonides at that instant, as that alto∣gither confounded in his imaginations, he here set vp his rest confirming, that if England were as happie for subiectes as it
was blessed in a Prince, that it might be reported of, as it was of Rome in the time of Cato, that the gouernement was happy by reasons of vertues, but especially blessed in so gratious a gouernesse. Herevpon he posted ouer his wanderpng eies to more ba∣ser, yet seemely obiectes, and takyng the viewe of the beauti∣full Ladies in Courte, in whome beholdyng such strange and sundrie fashions, such imitating of all excesse, that was vsed through Europe, he concluded in his imagination, that either the Ladies bare these patternes in scorne of the abuse, or loath to yeelde to anie countrie in curiositie, vouchsafed the fashion though they admitted not the vice. When he looked into the whole state of Gentlemen, and finding some of the yonger sorte to be more than halfe effemi∣nate, light in attire, imitating such newfangles, as are vn∣seamly for men. He varied in his opinion thus much, that ei∣ther Euphues sought to confirme him by contraries, or English brauery was Napolitan excesse, and that both Napolitan and Englishe ryot was to be lamented, not commended. This befell on Simonides in the oueruewe of the Englishe Court, and thus fared it in his fantasies, so that in him self he began to conclude an opinion, when at the very instant noble Su∣rius with Madamosilla Camilla, with Philautus in the compa∣ny, all at one instante came vnto him, conductyng him vnto their mantion house, where Simonides beheld such new brauery as wrought in his minde a new wonder.: The musicke was so delicate, the meate so daintie, the entertainment so hartie, the seruise so statly, the seruitours so seamly, to conclude euery thing was so sumptious, as the glory of the Spanish Court sea∣med proposterous in comparison. Camilla willing to delight the straunger with as great vari∣etie as she could, leauing the rest of the companie, betooke her self to entertaine him, began in these tearmes to commence her discourse. Curtious Gentleman, it seemeth me that either you are fed with disdain, or led with some mislike, your behauiour is so ma∣lancholike, and your demeanour so miscontent: if ought be here
therefore that mislikes you, forbid it, if any thing that myght delight you command, and it shall be had. Madam saied Simonides, if wonder bread malencholie, I confesse my self subiect to the humour, the pleasures here bee so infinit, as one drowneth an other, & al haue relation to one beau∣tie on whiche thei attend, whiche amongst all the delightes that wait on your Court, on myne Honour most contenteth mee. And if beautie please your affectes so much (saied Camilla) truely this house is vnfortunate onely in that pleasure, notwith∣standyng, such louely browne as our Courtiours are acostomd to, you maie be aquainted with: and your Ladieship maie doe me great fauour in this (saied Simonides) wherevpon the La∣die callyng out three of the most beautiefull Damoseles of her traine, began to discourse againe thus with Simonides. Since (noble Spaniard) it is beautie that delighteth you, I haue brought you three patturns to imploye your cunnyng on, whiche shall atend both on your cup and trencher, and sup∣plie such simple discourse as their yong heades will afford them And I madame (aunswered Simonides) gratiously accept your honourable curtisie and their singuler fauour: wherevpon streinyng ech of them gentely by the hand he began to discourse with them thus. Faire Ladies if all perfection of your myndes, be aunswer∣able to the habitudes of your bodies, I feare me that neither any climat in Europe, can afford more beautifull nor ouerlooke more wise. Mistris Elida, a Gentlewoman of very quicke capacitie, and incomparable beautie, aunswered him thus. Gentleman, since so preiudicially you condemne all Eurpe, and admit of three silly offalles of beautie, leauyng a whole Ca∣tologe of Courtiers vnlookt, yet seemeth either you count vs mete subiectes to worke vppon, since our imperfections be so many, and the onely browne which furthereth your whit in your secret imagenation: which if it be so, you maie if it please you go forward in your purpose, and we silly siphers will sit still, while you figure forth your fantisie, My faire Maidens (saied Simonides) I am neither so cor∣rupt in nature, neither so alinated from good nurture, to saie
one thyng and thinke an other, nor so sequestred from all good gouernement, as not to conclude with iudgement and deter∣mine with discretiō, if therfore you doubt I alter in any thing, I craue you to yeeld a reason before repulse, and condemne not without a cause. Thucida ye second returned him this answere. Signior Simonides, if your opinion and thoughtes worke a like, the ende must thus followe, that where you alowe so pre∣cisely you must loue a little, els in contemnyng that you com∣mende, we shall condemne you in that you pleade not guiltie. And will you binde me (Mistris) to that extreamitie (saied Simonides) truely then the case will goe harde, for if it must be concluded, that I must loue there where I commend, I should loue the white Mercurie though deadly poyson, I should feede on the glorious Diamonde though rancke Aconitum, yea, I should by the deemyng of myne eye, bee domed to myne owne destruction: but because it is wisedome to auoyde suche an er∣rour, faire Ladies I must conclude this, that I loue you all be∣yng beautifull, I honour you beyng vertuous, and reuerence you beyng wise. I but (saied Mistris Philida) these colours are not halfe wel shadowed, I must tey you within shorter limites, you loue vs all you saie, sir and we like you, but well I wot three suche flees would comber one bed, and one suche Gentleman, would be shrewdly cloyed to mannage suche a leashe of merlines, you must therefore growe to an equalitie, and alowyng one the su∣perioritie in beautie, shrowd your self vnder her fauour, so wee shall be left to them that list, you aloted to her you loue, and the Gentlewoman wonne by your good like, loue hym faithfully whiche esteemeth of her so nobly. Simonides, vpon the sodaine thus tropmed vpon, was almost past all helpe how to recouer hymself: notwithstandyng, tru∣styng vnto the plausabilitie of his wit, he concluded all their circumuentions by this pretie delaie. It was a custome (faire Ladies) amongst the most renowned Cities bothe of Asia and Europe, in matters of importaunce, not to conclude vppon the opinion of the Citizens, but to refere the censure to the Ora∣cle of Appollo, whose imitations since I knowe them necessa∣rie,
I will now alowe of, beseechyng you (Mes dames) to giue me leaue to take counsaile of my pillowe, and to morrowe you shall bothe heare my resolution, and I doubt not but alowe of my choyce. No soner had he ended, but Madame Camilla brake vp the assembly, so the night drawyng on, and the companie readie to departe, Philautus and Simonides, bothe takyng their leaue, withdrewe them to their Lodgyng, where Simonides, counsai∣lyng with his pillowe, of that he had seen by daie, and remem∣bryng hymself of his Mistris Clarinda, he brake out into this discourse. I see now that the state of the worlde is straunge, and opi∣nions of men vncertaine, the pleasures of this life but shado∣wes, and no happinesse to a contented mynde. Haue I trauailed from Athens to England to be acquain∣ted with vertue? Haue I left Athens and sought Englande to finde continent staiednesse, and neither in Athens nor in En∣gland, can I finde what I lookt for. The sumptuous Buildin∣ges of stately Pallaces, the gorgious attire of the Ladies, the noble entertainment of the Gentlemen is to be accompted of, yet the vertue Simonides lookt for, beyng resident in continēce, not in excesse, I thinke it more conuenient to giue Englande, a worldly commendation, then suche greate titles of vertue as I can not finde here. Thou maiest see now Simonides what trust is in vncertaine praise, what difference betweene the name and nature, and since thou hast gathered vp all these experiences together, confirme now thy self, returne al these benefites to Ciuill, where acquain∣ted with thy Mistris Clarinda, thou maist practise the experi∣mentes of all places in Ciuill, and hauyng attained the loue thou hast lōg looked for, satisfie thy self with the remembrance of thy forepassed trauailes: and confirmed by experience cease to doate vpon this wicked worlde to muche. Vpon these resolutions, all delight of ouer vewing England was ceased, and now at last our Trauailer bethinkes hymself of home, and willyng to make ende of all his sorrowes, on the morrowe he began to harken out shippyng for Spayne, which
because it is frequent about London, he was not long a see∣king, and pretendyng presently to be packyng, he sent his ne∣cessaries aboard, and willyng with some honourable adewe, to satisfie all his English freendes, he enuited them all to a noble Spanyards house within the Citie, where entertainyng them all very royally, and acquaintyng them with his departure, he gaue them all this freendly farewell. Noble Surius and courtious Camilla, worthy Philautus and gracious Madame Fraunces, Gentlemen and Gentlewomen in generall, if for my many courtesies with thankefull accep∣taunce, if for noble entertainement with humble requitall, Si∣monides maie be aunswerable to his Englishe freendes in any thyng, no doubt but his departure would bee bothe pleasaunt and his returne short, but since the Englishe Nobilitie exceede so muche in curtesie that none maie come nere them, I thinke it requisite for me onely to build vppon thankes, assuryng you all of this, that if the poore Spanyard, maie meete any his En∣glishe freendes in Ciuill, he will not be ingrate for great huma∣nitie. In these and suche like tearmes, giuyng them his Ʋl∣timum vale, they all tooke their leaue, yet very lothe of his de∣parture, onely Philautus and his vyolet accompanied hym to the Riall Exchaunge, where bestowyng no smal store of Crow∣nes on presentes for his Mistris Clarinda, they conducted him to Blackwall, where leauyng hym to the mercie of the Floud, Philautus tooke his leaue in these tearmes. Noble Simonides, since thy occasions bee suche that they make thy departure thus sodaine, I can not but be sorry, yet ho∣pyng all shall turne to thy auaile, I am somewhat satisfied: Notwithstandyng, this I request thee, that my vyolet and I maie sometymes heare from thee, and if a merrie gale blowe for England, if thou make a cut ouer, we will not be vnthank∣full for thy curtesie. Simonides ouerpressed with sorrowes, gaue Philautus this shorte replye. Noble Italian, these teares I shead maie witnesse what I meane, many wordes I can not vse for you see what interrup∣teth me, Simonides is and will be yours: Herevpon imbrasing
Philautus and his wife, he left them to their pleasures and be∣tooke hymself to his Iourney. ❧ How Simonides shippyng for Spayne ariued at Ciuill, and with what fruites his Loue concluded. LIttle knewe the poore Louer how cold his entertainement should be in Ciuill, for Cla∣rinda bothe forgettyng Simonides himself, and also her owne protestation of vowed chastitie, after his departure for al her sim∣peryng ciuillitie, became the maried wife of an olde doating Citizen called Baldio, a man neither of equalitie in yeares to fit her likyng, nor shape of person to procure her pleasure, but the onely cullice the Mi∣ser had to comforte her, were a fewe rustie Crownes, sealed vp in an olde bagge, which in reason, should not so much preuaile to bewitche a faire Ladie, but suche are the dispositions of wo∣men, that like the Weathercocke thei turne at their pleasures, and like a feather in the winde, they are moued with euery breath of perswasion. But Simonides ignoraunt of the sequell, ariued at Ciuill, the rumor of whose returne, was brought to ye eares of his father, but Lorde how pleasaunt were these newes to the olde man, how iocond was the mother, the whole Citie gaue him a frend∣ly welcome: But as euery sweete is quickly ouerlaied with a little sowre, and the Sunne darkened with a blacke Cloude, so these delightes were as sone crossed, by the vniust disaster of Clarinda the vncourteous. For, Simonides enquiryng for his Mistris, was aunswered how she was maried to an olde Mar∣chaunt called Baldio her neighbour, how comfortable these ne∣wes might be to Simonides, Louers, I reporte me to you, doe you thinke he did not take it greeuously, yes assure your sel∣ues: He forsooke all pleasures of the Citie, and renting in pee∣ces that trashe whiche he had prouided for her, he enueied thus
bitterly against womankinde. Is this the fruites of Loue, O you Heauens, are these the rewardes of loyall seruice, are womens fantasies so fickle, and Ladies trothes so vncertaine. Oh wicked sexe, that vnder faire white, shrowdest blacke venome, that vnder seemely substaun∣ces, concludest vnstable perfections. Cursed Clarinda, thin∣keth thou thy iniustice is not suche, as the very blemishe stai∣neth all womenhood? Was age more seemely for thy bed then youth? Was loathsomnesse in better likyng then tried loue? Diddest thou vowe to be chast, and hast proued dissolute. Canst thou promise faire, and performe so ill. Wouldest thou shewe to be a Sainct, and proue a Deuill. Wouldest thou looke de∣murely, and like dishonestly. Couldest thou simper it with ci∣uilitie, and bee bereft of all humanitie. Woe is me that gaue trust to inconstancie, learnt Loue on vnworthie, shewed fauour to falshood, and continued constaunt to a carrion. Farre was thy nature (Clarinda) from Nobilitie, that ma∣dest no better choyce, but it was in despight of Simonides, who in despite of thee will conclude thus, Foemina blanditur laqueos parat arma ministrat Foemina Cerberum dignè fouere canem. In these detestations Simonides finished his loue, betakyng himselfe wholy to inueigh against feminine inconstancie, and framyng himselfe to more orderly studies, hee concluded the Catastrophe of loue with this cautile, beauty is vniust, women inconstant, louers fooles, he most fortunate that can forbeare, and blessed that is not burnt.
The Authours conclusion to the Ladies and Gentlewomen. LAdies and Gentlewomen, hauing brought Simonides to Ciuill, & hea∣ryng his inuectiue agaynste the fe∣mine in general, bicause he founde Clarinda onelie slipper: I altogy∣ther displeased with his preiudicial exclamations, began in hote terms to disalow of his vnsemely vpbrai∣dings, he (poore Gentleman) no∣thing at all discountenaunced by the memorie of his misfortunes, gaue this answere: It is not the faire damoselles of England, my freend, nor the glorie of that nation, which I comprehend wythin these limites of re∣proofe, but onelie our changelings of Ciuil, for suche of your countrie, would God I had eyther loued there, or neuer tra∣uailed hither: O blessed England, where Ladies are so learned, Gentlewomen so constant, Virgines so modest, nay all the feminine sexe so honourable: they neuer offend in breache of faith, they neuer looke with vnchaste eies, they neuer burne in vnlawfull lust, they neuer vse to commit abuse: Their beautie hath no staine but of nature, their minds are not alinated with pride, their passions grow not on light loue, they are not car∣ried with euerie light perswasion, they are not subiect to flat∣tering allurementes, they are not faultie in any thing that is licencious or light: they are religious not loose, they are com∣ly, yet constant, they are modest, yet mercifull: yea suche they be as their honorable actions do onely make me alowe of their sexe, and wish, that either I might be partaker of their graces or the offals of their good qualities, were bestowed on oure
brauest Spanishe Ladies, wythin this countrie. I beeing thus perswaded (good Ladies) by this vnfained reporte of Simonides, was vnwilling to let slippe anie one iote of praise that tendeth to your preferment, and what Simoni∣des saide in Ciuil, I am readie to auouch it here in London, and if hee or I haue erred in anie thing, I referre mee to youre owne iudgements, and conclude wyth Simonides, that you are the onelie blessings of this life, the onelie sweetes of the worlde, and the onelie paragones, bothe of Asia, Africa and Europe, and this I set down as an article of my be∣liefe, and so Mes dames I commend me to your good graces. FINIS.
