24163 S101662 54532454 180881
ornamental border A most godly enstruction and very necessarie lesson to be learned of all chri∣sten men and womē, before they come to ye Communion of the bodie & bloud of our sauiour Christe Iesus. ☞ Compiled by Ri∣chard Tracie. Anno. M.D.xlviii
SAint Peter sayeth that oure aduersary the de∣uyl, i. Peter .v. lyke a roringe lion goeth aboute sekynge whom he may deuowre. So that his erneste studie and purpose is euer fixed, other wyth fierce cru∣elty or with pleasaunte suggestiō or wyth importune hote tempta∣cion, to allure and entise man, to disobeye goddes lawe, whereby he myght bringe man, into lyke misery and eternall peyne where∣in he nowe iustly suffereth. But if he can not atteyne his purpose by these meanes before declared: then he transfigureth and chaun¦geth hymselfe, into an Angell of lighte, and pretendeth to setforth and maynteyne religion, takyng some text and parte of holy scrip∣ture to bee hys whole authoritie principle & groūd. So that bring¦inge and allegynge for him, the
holye scripture: no man shall mi∣struste any disceyte or euyl in hys procedinges, and then moste cra∣ftelye he intendeth to disceyue e∣uen as he entended to disceyue Christe, coluring hys malyciouse entent, with authorities of holye scripture. Mat .iiii. Euen so he wyth lyke disceyte and policy and wyth no lesse malice towardes man (hear∣inge thys promise of Christe, He that eateth my fleshe & drinketh my bloude dwelleth in me and I in him) hath inuented the doctrin of transubstanciation, of breade into Christes naturall body, and of wyne into Christes naturall blude, by force of certaine wordes spoken by the priest. And so by the clerenes of the wordes spoken by a priste: wyll perswade the Ignorant people, wyth lyke fonde opinion where∣with ye Caparnites wer led, to be∣leue
that they mygthe eate Chri∣stes fleshe wyth theyr teeth, and dryncke and swallowe Christes bloude wyth their throtte, frome the whiche grosse opinion Christ perswaded the saide Caparnites to leaue, sayinge. Dooe these my saynges offend you? What and you shal se the son of man ascend wher he was before? It is the spi¦rite that quickeneth, the fleshe profiteth not any thing. The de∣uell not wythstanding thys doc∣trine of Christ, wherby he taught the spirituall eatynge of his flesh and drinkinge of his bloud, hath sowed this false doctrine of tran∣ssubstanciation, in the hertes of greate clerkes byshopes and of other spiritual pastours, and wit tye babes of the worlde, that by suche teachers, and highe powrs the people myght be led, & taught to truste, that they had sufficient∣ly
eaten Christes fleshe, whē they haue eaten the sacramente, wyth their teth & trusting to ye gros eat¦ing with their teth: thei shuld not enquire, nor serch, for anye godly and spirituall eatynge of Chri∣stes fleshe, by fayeth, whereby it myght be profitable to their sou∣les, for the which entent and pur∣pose all sacramentes, were insti∣tuted & ordeyned, that is to feede the mynde, and not the mouth, to comforte the soule? and not the body, and all thys false doctryne of transsubstanciation the deuyl hath enduced thorow the clernes of these wordes spokē by the prist saiyng, this is mi bodi, although that thorowe all the holye scrip∣tures, where they entreate of sa¦cramentes, they euer call sacra∣mentes by the same name of the thinges wherof they be sacramē∣tes, as it appereth the .xvii. of Ge¦nesis, where circumsicion is cal∣led
goddes couenaunte, whiche was but the sacramente thereof, and in the .xii. of Exodi where the Easter lambe, was called the pa∣ssouer of the Lord, which was but a sacrament therof. And the Cha∣lice is called the newe testamente which is but the sacrament ther∣of, yea Christ is called syn, which was onely the sacrifice for synne, And therfore Christen reader be not disceyued by the clearnes of the wordes, but conferre and trie the scriptures, by other places of holy scriptur diligently readyng this litel treatise folowing, wher¦in yu shalt find, I trust a spiritual eating of christs flesh & drinking of his bloude, taughte by the pri∣matiue churche and the auncient holy fathers, whiche dyd write of the same, before the deuyll hadde corrupted the holy scripture with false gloses and wicked interpre∣tacions.
And thys I commytte the gentle reader to almyghtye GOD who geue the hys spirite whereby thou mayste haue the true vnderstandynge and swete taste of his ho∣ly worde and spirituall eatinge of hys fleshe to thy spiritual co∣moditie and eter∣nall healthe of thy soule. Amen.
FIrst it is to be noted, that all Sacramentes aswell of the olde lawe as also of the newe lawe: were instituted and ordey∣ned of God to put vs in remem∣braunce of his most louing bene∣fites and most mercifull kyndnes shewed and done vnto vs. Which benefites, these sacramentes tho∣rough gods worde doe offer vnto our mindes and not to our senses and we receyue the said benefites by faythe, into oure soules, and not wyth our senses into our bo∣dyes. Sacramētes be of such cō¦ditions and nature, that they ha∣ue in them two thinges to be con¦sidered, the one is an outward vi∣sible thinge which perteyneth vn¦to the bodyly senses and is also receiued therby. The other thing is not perceyued nor receyued wt any bodily senses, but as a pure and mere spiritual thing, a bene∣fite
done by God vnto mā, pertei∣nyng only vnto the soule, whyche spiritual benefite is geuen & done by god vnto man: because it shold be had & reteyned in cōtinual me∣morye of the christiā man. These outward & sensible thynges, were instituted and ordeined to sygni∣fie & represent the same, hauing in nature a propertie and condi∣cion somewhat cōfirmable & lyke to expres, and represent the thing which thei declare and singnifie. As bread hath a natural properti to fede, cōfort, and sustain the na∣tural bodi: so Christes bodi betrai¦ed and his bloud shed for the re∣mission of our sinnes: feadeth, cō∣forteth, and susteyneth, the soule of the christian man, borught in∣to greate feare and sorowe, with the yght of the multitude and greuosnes of his sinnes. Which hungreth and ernestlie thristeth
for the iustice of God, and remissi∣on of hys sayed synnes. And if these thynges be well noted and pondered, it wyll cause to cease contencion moued about the ma¦ner of receyuyng of the sacramēt for all christean mē muste conde∣scend and agre, that euery fayth∣full Christian, (thorough Gods word in ye sacramēt, dulie to him exhibited and ministred doth eat and receyue bi faith in Gods pro∣myse, Christes fleshe and drync∣keth his bloude. So that ye thing is not in contencion. Whether we eate Christes flesh, or dryncke hys bloude or no in ye Sacramēt but the forme & maner of eatyng Christes fleshe and drynkyng his bloude is in cōtēciō. For some of the clergie striue stowtly, and tea¦che vngodlie that we should eate and receyue Christes naturalle-bodye wyth our teth, drynke and
swallowe hys bloude wyth oure mouth and throte affirming veri grossely Christes natural bodie so to be naturally reallye, and bo¦deli present, in the sacrament ther¦of, and that euerie man whych re¦ceyueth the sacrament, receyueth also the natural bodie of Christ: be he neuer so wicked & vnfayth∣ful. An other sort of teachers, pre∣ach, ye receiuing of the sacrament, with our mouth and chewing it wyth our teth: we eate not nor re¦ceyue Christes natural bodi: and drinking and receiuing the wine with our lippes & throt, we drink not Christes bloude, except we faithfully and constantlie beleue Christes bodie to be betrayed for vs: and his bloud to be shed for ye remission of oure sinnes, For the mouth (saye they) receyueth not nor tasteth, anie other thing then breade and wyne. But Christes
body slaine & his bloud shed for the remission of our sinnes (which is the spirituall gyfe and grace of God geuen to vs in the sacramēt) the soule eateth and receyueth by fayth to his great spiritual com¦fort, cōmoditie, and profit: and the mouth: cannot receiue, nor tast it. For cōfirmacion wherof, thei say that man consisteth and is made of a bodie and of a soule, the bodi is a natural and a materiall sub∣stance, which is fed with natural and corporal sustenaunce, & nory∣shement. And the soule of man, (which we cal the spirit & mynde) is a spiritual substaūce which cā not eate nor receiue anye bodelie meat & sustinaūce. For the soule being a spiritual substaūce, hath no teth mouth nor stomacke, to re¦ceyue or degest anie suche bodelie sustinaūce, Math .xv. for that which entreth into the mouthe defileth not the
soule (which is in the inward mā) saith Christ. So in lykewise, that whiche entreth into the mouthe profiteth not the soule (beyng the inward man) which cānot receiue it So that the sacrament, which (ye vngodlie sai) bi vertue of gods word spoken by the priest, is tur¦ned into the natural, reall, and corporal bodie of Christes natu∣ral substaunce, leauyng ye nature of bread, is yet such a natural sub¦staunce that cānot enter into the spiritual soule, by bodelie eatyng and receyuynge therefore with ye mouth. For our soule is norished fed, & liueth bi the spirit of Christ and not by the bodeli eatyng of his body with our teeth. For in ye maner of eatinge with the teeth, Christes flesh profiteth not (saith Christ) It is his holy spirit that quckeneth and maketh vs aliue, for spirit liueth not but bi the spi∣rit
of Christ. For whosoeuer hath the spirit of Christ, ye same is Chri¦stes saith Paul And as touching this bodeli eating of Christes bo¦die, with the teeth of men, it diffe¦reth not from the fond & vngodli opinion of the Capernaites reher¦sed in the .vi. of Ihon. Which hearyng Christ say: I am ye bread of lyfe and the bread which I wil geue you is my fleshe. And fur∣ther he sayd, excepte you eate my flesh, & drink my bloud you shal not haue life in you. They sayde, this word and sayng is veri hard Who can heare hym? how can he geue vs his flesh to eate? For thei thought that he woulde haue ge∣uen vnto thē, perceles, and gob∣bettes of hys natural, and bodily flesh to eate with their teeth, and to haue let out part of hys natu∣ral bloud for them to drink. Euē lyke as some of our clergie grose¦lie
(and no lesse fondlie) imagyne and without any feare of God, or worldlie shame preache, the same And althoughe Christ louyngly, myndyng and wyllyng to teache them, the profitable and spiritual eatyng and drinkyng of his flesh and bloude, sayde: doo these my wordes offende you? what and yf you shall see the sonne of manne ascēde where he was before? The spirit quickneth, the fleshe profi∣teth not. Yet this his answer, did nothyng teach theym the godlye and spiritual eatyng & drinking of his naturall fleshe and bloude because as Christ sayd there were som of them which did not beleue So that without true belefe no man can eate Christes fleshe and drinke his bloud, Iohn .vi. and then he ea∣teth and drynketh it spirituallie to his godli profite. Also if the sa∣cramēt be turned into Christes
natural and real bodie (as the most part of oure cleargie vntrulie do preache, & teache.) then it weare also reson, that the same natural-and reall bodie should also be re∣ceiued and perceiued with our sē¦ses. For Christes natural bodie al though it be nowe glrified and immortal, yet it is not so spiritu∣all that it is inuisible, and that proued Christ, when after his re∣surrectiō he appered vnto his dis¦ciples, saiyng. Luke .xxiiii Fele and se a spirit hath not fleshe & bones, as you se¦me haue. Wherfor doubtles if his real, and natural bodie, were cor∣porally present in the sacramente it sholde be both felt, and sene. Be¦cause selynge, and feinge, be two naturall properties, declared by-Christ, whereby a naturall bodie is perceiued and knowne to be vi¦sible and to occupie place. For as saint Augustine sayth to Darda¦num.
That doubtles Christes na¦tural bodie is in heauē. For saith he, take from bodies the roume & space of places: and they shalbe no where, and if thei be no where, thē thei shall not be. Wherfore, if his naturall bodie were in the sa¦crament: it must nedes occupie roume and place in the sacramēt, Hebru .iiii. euen aswell as it doth in heauen or aswell as anye other naturall substaunce occupieth place. And thē Christes bodie, beyng and oc¦cupiyng place in heauen: cannot also in one tyme, occupie place in the sacrament. For hys naturall bodie cannot occupie two places bothe at one tyme. For Christ is like vnto vs his reasonable crea¦turs in all thyngs (except onlie in syne) But our bodies after our resurrection shalbe visible: where¦fore doubtles Christes bodie shal also be visible, whersoeuer it be
presēt. Or elese he hath no natu∣ral bodie But a shadow, or fanta¦sticall bodi which is Marcians-heresye. Christ also saith, Iohn .xvi you shal haue pore folkes alweis with you but me you shal not haue alwais wyth you. Also Iesus knowynge that his howre was come, that he should go to his father. How shal he go to hys father (excepte in his humanitie) which euer was pre¦sent with his father in hys God∣head? Act .iii. Also S. Peter in the Actes sayth, repent and turne you, that your synnes may be done awaye. That when the tyme of rest shall come from the syght of the lorde, & he shal send him which is prea∣ched vnto you Iesus Christ, whō the heauens must receyue, vntyl all thynges whiche were spoken bi the mouth of the prophetes be fulfylled. Also Paul sayth, as of∣ten as we shall eate of the breade i. Cor .xi.
and drynke of the cuppe, we shall shewe the death of the Lorde vn∣tyll he come, whiche wordes (vn∣tyl he come,) declare to be spoken of one that is absente, and not of one that is presente. Wherefore, doubtles Christes naturall body is absente, in heauen, and not pre¦sent in a corporall presence in the Sacramēt of the aultare: which is no dyscomeforte, nor hurte to vs, that hys naturalle bodie is presēt in heauen. For as the sone in sommer whē he is most highest and distant from vs workethe in the earthe most effectuousli, and yeldeth hys vertue most feruent∣lye and aboundantlye vpon all earthelie thynges: so in likewise Christes natural bodie although he be in heauen most distaunt frō vs, yet not with standing he wor∣kethe in hys people most effectu∣ouslie & geuethe hys grace most
abundauntli to vs as he himselfe wyttenesseth to hys apostles sai∣yng, it is expedient and necessarie that I go from you to my father.Ihon .xvi For yf I shoulde not goo to my father, the hollye ghoste shoulde not be sent to you. Therforeseing that so many holi scriptures wyt¦nes that Christes naturall bodye is in heauen and also that it is no dyscōmodie nor hurt to vs yt it so be I trust euerie good christi∣an man, wyll holde hym content and satisfied. And on ye other par¦tie yf we shoulde graunt christes naturall bodie weare so presente in the sacrament that the breade were chaunged into hys natural bodie and the wyne into hys na∣turall bloude leauynge ye nature of bread: then bothe the godlie & wycked, the faythful and also the vnfaythfull should eate Christes naturall bodie & drynke hys na∣turall
bloude which is agaynste all the aunciente wryters, Augustin vpō the .xx¦vi. treatise of Iohn. that make a diuersitie betwyxt, the ea∣tyng of the sacramēt, & the recey∣uing of the thynge represēted by the sacrament. The godlie and ye vngodlie receyuethe sacramente saye they, but the thynge represen¦ted in and bi the sacramēt, which is Christes bodie broken and his bloude shed out for the remission of our synnes: no man cā eate ex∣cepte the faytheful by fayth. Also Christ saythe that he is the bread of lyfe whych came from heauen, yf a mā eate of that bread he shall lyue euerlastynglie. Iohn .vi. And he that eatethe my fleshe and drynkethe my bloude, hathe eternalle lyfe. Whych wordes cannot be verifi∣ed nor trulie spoken of the eating of the sacramente. For many eate that to their eternal dānacion. Which
by Christes wordes of his promi∣ses made vnto vs, they could not do, if the breade were chaūged in∣to Christes naturall bodye. Also if the bread & wyne be not chaun∣ged into Christes naturall body and bloud, bi the word (as in ded they be not but the substaunces remayne in their nature) yet, yf we hearing ye promes of GOD declared vnto vs, that his bodye was betrayed for vs, & hys bloud shed for the remission of our syn∣nes, beleue the same, and receiue ye sacramēt: we then eate Christes naturall body and bloude in spi∣rit and fayth to our euerlastinge lyfe, although, we beleue not any maner of transubstancion of the bread into Christes natural bodi and the wine into Christes natu∣ral bloude. But by such transub∣stancion the receyuer of the sacra¦ment should also receiue Christes
body and bloud. If the bread and wyne were chaūged into Christes natural bodi & bloud, And thē as I haue sayd, the most wicked In∣fidels myght, (eating the Sacra∣ment) eat also Christes fleshe and drink his bloud which is not onli against the saiynge of the blessed martyr s. Ciprian, Hillarius, and saint Augustine: but also against the saieynge of Christe, whyche sayth, he that eatethe my fleshe, and drinketh my bloude, he dwel¦leth in me, and I in hym, whyche no vnfaythfull can dooe. For as Christ sayth the seruaunt dwel∣leth not in the house for euer. ¶ Therfore the faithful beleuer in Christ is sure to eate Christes fleshe and dryncke hys bloude, to hys eternall health, although he neuer beleue any such grosse trā∣substanciacion: And the vnfayth¦ful, can neuer eate hys flesh (as
Saynt Augustine saieth) he why¦che eateth my fleshe, Augustin xxv treatse vpon Iohn and drinke∣eth my bloude, he dwelleth in me and I in hym. Thys is therefore to eate that breade, and dryncke yt dryncke, to dwell in Christ, and to haue Christ dwelling in him. And therfore he which dwelleth not in Christ: & in whom Christ dwel¦leth not, doubtles eateth not Chri¦stes fleshe nor drinketh his bloud although to his iudgmēt, he eate the sacramēt of so great a thing. Also ye same doctour saint August¦tine again saith, truly this bread, requireth the hongre of ye inward man. Augustine .x¦vi. treatise ¦pon Iohn For blessed be they whych hungr and thyrste for rightuous∣nes, verily to beleue in hym, that is to eate the liuing bread: he whi¦che beleueth in hym, eateth inuisi¦bli and is filled because he is inui¦sibly borne againe. ¶ Wherfore doubtles, the spiri∣tuall
eatynge of Christes bodye, (which is to beleue in him) is on∣ly ye godli eating of Christes, flesh and drinkyng hys bloud, and not thys outwarde bodilye eatynge wyth theyr teeth, fayne they ne∣uer so craftelie. This false tran∣substantiacion which repugneth agaynst all the auncient writers, and also agaynst the holie scrip∣tures whyche be declared by the mouthe of Paule, i. Cor .x. saiyng, I wyll not brethren yt ye bee ignoraunt, that all our fathers were vnder a cloude, and all passed the sea, and all were baptised in Moses, and in the cloude, and in the sea, and all dyd eate one spirituall-meate, and all dranke one spiri∣tuall drynke, they drancke of the spirituall rocke, whiche folowede them, the rocke trulie was Christ And if our fathers before Chri, stes incarnacion, and we that be¦leue
nowe: do eate one spiritual meate & drink one spiritual drink (but oure Fathers dyd not eate Chrystes naturall, and reall bo∣die, nor dryncke hys reall bloude, whych, two thousande yeares af∣ter was not incarnated, nor had any naturall bodie) therefore we do not nowe eate hys reall bodie in hys bodelie presence, in the sa∣crament, as these by ther trāsub∣stantiacion pretende. For we eate the same that our fathers did eate which eating was by faith. Ergo euen so muste we eate by faythe Christes fleashe and drynke hys bloude in the sacrament, and not wyth our teeth reallie, if we wyl∣bee saued by the eatynge of Chri∣stes fleshe & drynkyng his bloud as they were. ¶ All the auncient writers writ and teach that we eate Christes bodie and drinke his bloud in the
sacrament, in a mysterie, that is in a similitude, whych cannot be estemed reallye, for they be con¦traies For to eate a reall thing is with the mouth to eate naturallie the substaunce, but al misteries be receyued & eaten wyth the mynde and not bi anye bodelie meanes And therfore the sacrament is cal¦led of most auncient writers, Pa¦nis misticus, A mysticall breade which was ordeyned to feade and comforte the soules, and not for ye bodie. ¶ Chrisostome sayth that Christ gaue vs no sensible thynges but rather insensible thynges, Upon the .vi Iohn the xlvi. omelie & those thynges which were insensible or spirituall thynges, ¶ Seynt Ambros vpon the .xi. chapiter of the fyrst to the Corin∣thians, speakyng to them whych shoulde receyue the sacramente, saith that thei should, iudge with
them selues that it is the Lorde whose bloude they drynk in a mi∣sterie, whych bloud is a witnes of the benefites of god. Also in his boke of the sacramentes, he say∣eth because we bee deliuered by ye death of the lord we remembring the same, in eatyng & drynkynge do syngnyfie the deathe of ye lorde ¶ Also Eusebius saythe because he would take away his bodi out of our syghte, and cary it aboue the starres, it was necessary that in this time, he should consecrate for vs the sacrament of hys bodie and bloude, that it might be wor∣shipped in a misteri, which was offered for our price. The xi. Hom vpon the .v. of Mathew. ¶ Also Chrissostome saythe yf it be so perelous to occupie the halo¦wed vessels vnto a priuate vse in whome christes verie true bodi is not▪ but the mystery of his bodie is conteynede: howe muche more
ought we not to geue the vessels of our bodies to the Deuyll that he maye do in thē what he wyll. Psalm .lxxxxviii. ¶ Also Seynt augustine saithe you shall not eate this bodie whi∣che you see, nor drynke ye bloud yt they shal shede whiche wil crucifi me, I haue comended vnto you a sacramente spirituallye vnder standed which shall quicken you and althoughe it be necessarie to be celebrated, and done visiblye yet it muste be spirituallie vnder∣standed, wherfore doubtles there is no suche fonde transubstancia∣cion, as our clergie (whyche can not vnderstād & perceiue ye godly & spiritual eateing of christs flesh) haue grosli imagined. But ye god¦ly & profitable eating is by faithe as I haue declared, wherin there is not required any transubstan∣ciacion: But in thys transubstan∣ciacion, Sathan hathe broughte
hys wycked wyll and purposse to passe whyche is that ther was ne¦uer so godli a thing bi god ordei∣ned for mā whiche ye Deuyl hath not other obscured, or made darck the same by chaunging the ryght vse thereof, into an abuse, or ta∣kyng awey, the vertue comoditie and profet of ye thing, leauing the name inestemation, or els peruer¦tyng the thynge whyche was or∣deyned of God, to be most godly and profytable to manne, that through the abuse therof, it is be come most wicked and damnable to man. As for a lamentable ex∣ample in this beggery and Anti¦christian transubstantiation, it is to manifest, wherein some of our Cleargie, haue most wickedli & blindly taught the people of this realme, that they shoulde beleue that in that they receiued the sa∣crament, that they wythout any
doubte dyd eate Christes fleshe & dryncke hys bloude, because (by vertue of the worde spoken bi the priest) the bread is chaunged into Christes naturall flesh and bloud wherefore receiuinge and eatyng the breade they shoulde eate Chri¦stes fleshe and bloud whiche they dyd nothynge lesse. And so were ledde wt a false and fayned fayth to truste to haue by eatynge the sacramente eternall lyfe, euen for ye worcks sake, or because they eat it wt theyr teeth whiche onely dyd not profit them but also was their vtter dānation because they recey¦ued it wythout fayth. NOw Christen reader, I trust thou perceiuest, that in euery sacrament. Ther be two thinges to be considered, the one is the visyble substance, whych is offered, to the senses, & by and wyth the senses, we maye
receyue and vse the cōmoditie of it. The other is, the Inuisible grace, and liberall gifte of God, whych by the visible substance & the promyse of god, vnto ye same Ioyntely pronounced, is represē∣ted and geuen to al them yt faith∣fully, and constantely, beleue the same promesse. This spirituall gifte of god, is Christes body bro¦ken and his bloude shede, for the remyssion of our synnes, whyche spirituall gifte, bycause it is g∣uen to vs by godes liberal pro∣mes? It can not be otherwise re∣ceyued, but of a spirituall herte, and that thorow, and by, faythe onely, in ye same promesse Suche faythefull beleuers doubtles do eate Christes fleshe and dryncke his bloude in spirite and truthe: That is to saye receyue all the cō¦moditie and profet of all Christes passion, death, resurrection, and
ascention, whych is, remission of synnes, and eternall lyfe. In the receyuyng of this sacrament we professe not onely to be faythfull warriars agaynst the deuel, the worlde, and the fleshe, but also to be lyuely membres, of Christes mysticall body, wherof Christe is heade: wherfore aboue all thinge we must be circumspecte & wel∣ware, yt we defile not oure selues wyth any fylthy lustes & synnes wherby we shoulde be become a-fylthy, croked, and roten, mem∣ber wherof out head Iesu Christ shoulde not reioyce, but rather be a shamed, and so worthi to be cut of from the body. And then euen as ye braūch of ye tree whē it is cut of from the tre, receyueth nor ta∣keth any more sappe iuyse or na∣turall moyestnes of the tree, and therfore widdereth, dryeth and becometh deade, apte only for the fyer. In like maner if we thorow
oure obstynate perseueraunce in synne, be deuided from god, as ye prophets Esai & Hieremy saith & be no mysticall mēbre of Christes church his mysticall body: Hieremy .v. then can we receiue, no more fauoure grace nor lyfe, from Christe, but shal widder, die, and be apte only for the Hell fier vntyll it pleaseth god of mere mercy and grace, E∣uen as it were by his grace and infinyte power, & no lesse by hys myracles, contrary to our nature to graffe vs newly into Christes mysticall body, & endeue vs with his, new and heauenly spirite. Of the other parte if we be faythfull warriars of Christ, and striue cō∣stantly against the deuel, ye world and the fleshe, and beleue faythe∣fully that by and thorow Christe we shall ouercome the same, we shall doubteles be accepted and reputed and taken before god as
his naturall mēbres, euen fleshe of his fleshe & bones of his bones Such as he cā not but loue, che∣rishe, and fauoure, for who dyde euer hate his owne fleshe, but did norishe & cherishe it? Ephes .vi. saith Paule. Seing than that we be his natu∣rall membres euen fleshe of hys fleshe and bones of his bones: as Sinne hell and death could not preuaile, agaynst Christ: So cā they not preuaile agaynst vs, nor wythholde vs from Christe, for we be one wyth Christ, & we must nedes be where he is, accordynge to the prayer of Christ in the xvii of Iohn saying. Iohn .xvii Holy father kepe thē in thy name whome thou hast geuen me, that they maye be one, as we be, father whom thou hast geuen to me I will, where I am that they be with me, that is to be in heauen, & to haue eternall lyfe as Christ there saythe, father the
houre cometh, claryfy thy sonne, that thy sonne may claryfithe, as thou hast geuen to hym, power o∣uer all fleshe that all, that thou hast geue to him: he may gyue to them, eternall lyfe. If we be one wyth our head Christ, and in hea¦uen wyth hym to whome also he hath geuen eternall lyfe: Howe can synne hell or deathe preuayle agaynst vs, his liuely membres? Doubtles it is Impossible, wher¦fore let oure earnest study, prayer & laboure, be aboue all thynges, to kepe vs in his mysticall body, that we may be, lyuely members of the same, according as we pro∣fesse vs to be, by this holy cōmu∣nyon in this blessed sacrament of his bodye and bloude. Yea moste diligently and circumspectly be∣ware what thou doest loke that thou dissemble not, nor lye to the holy gost, ther can be no greatter
shame nor offence for the, than to professe before thy friendes & the hole cōgregatiō, wyth thy mouth countenāce and behauiour to be a faithfull Christian, And vtter¦ly to deny the same in thy herte, wordes, & deades, And although thou causte, thus colourably dis∣semble, and falselye disceyue, the Christen congregation, yet canst yu neuer deceyue Christe, whyche knoeth ye inward & secret though∣tes & fayned imagynaciōs of thy hert. Therfore I coūsel ye Christē ader, that thou Iustely truely, and diligently, examen thy lyfe, and consider well wyth thy selfe, whether thou be, a constant war∣ry ir agaynst synne. Proue whe∣ther thou purpose ernestli, and cō¦stantlie, so to continew vnto the death, & als whether thou haue vnite peace and herty vnfayned loue, towardes al ye congregaciō
whych is most manyfestly expres∣sed & signyfied by this sacramēt of Christes body and bloud. And thē last, try thy selfe whether thou beleue fayethfully to haue remi∣ssion of thy synnes and eternall lyfe thorow Christes passion and death onely, and not by any other merits of sayntes, prayers, or ho∣ly workes of thy owne, or of any other creature lyueyng or deade. If thou be fullye perswaded and determyned in all these thinges before wrytten, then mayest thou boldely come to this holy table, & to confirm thy fayth, receiue this holy sacrament of Christes body & bloud, for a erneste pledge of eternall lyfe. Whych graunte the that derely bought the to reigne wyth hym in eter∣nall glory FINIS
❧ Imprinted at London by Iohn Day and Wyllyam Seres, dwel∣lynge in Sepulchres Parish at the signe of the Resur∣rection a litle aboue Hol∣bourne Conduite. ☞ M.D.xlviii. the .v. of August ❧ Cum gratia & priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.
