2982 S124412 44920295 173744
❧ THE Epistels and Gospels for euery Sonday and Ho∣ly day throughout the whole yeare. After the vse of the Church of England. 1574 Imprinted at London by Iohn Aw∣deley, dwellyng in lit∣tle Brittain streete without Aldersgate. ¶Cum priuilegio.
¶The Epistles and Gospels for euery Sun∣day and Holy day throughout the whole yeare. ¶The first Sunday in Aduent. The Epistle. Roma. iii. OWe nothing to any man but thys, that ye loue one another. For he that loueth ano∣ther, fulfilleth the law. For these commaun∣dements: Thou shalt not commit adultery: Thou shalt not kyl: Thou shalt not steale: Thou shalt not beare false witnes: Thou shalt not lust, and so foorth (if there be any other commaundement) it is all comprehended in this saying, namely: Loue thy neighbour as thy selfe. Loue hurteth not hys neigh∣bour: therefore is loue the fulfilling of the lawe. This also we know the season how that it is time that we should now awake out of sleepe, for now is our saluati∣on nerer then when we beleued. The night is passed, the day is come nye: let vs therefore cast awaye the deedes of darknes, and let vs put on the armour of light. Let vs walke honestlye, as it were in the day light: not in eating and drinking, neither in chambring nor wanton∣nes, neither in strife and enuying: but put ye on the Lord Iesus Christ, and make no prouision for the flesh, to fulfill the lustes of it. ¶The Gospell. Math. xxi. ANd when they drew nye to Ierusalem and were come to Bethphage vnto mount Oliuet, then sent Iesus two of his Disciples saying vnto them: Go into the towne that lieth ouer against you, and anon you shall finde an Asse bound and her Colt with her, loose
them, & bring them vnto me. And if any man say ought vnto you, say ye, the Lord hath nede of them, & straight way he wyl let them go. Al this was done that it might be fulfylled which was spoken by the Prophet, saying: Tell ye the daughter of Sion, behold thy king commeth vnto thee meeke, sytting vpon an Asse & a Colt, the foale of the Asse vsed to the yoke. The Disciples went, and did as Iesus commaunded them, and brought the Asse and the Colt, and put on them their clothes, and set hym thereon. And many of the people spread their garments in the way. Other cut downe braunches from the trees and strawed them in the way. Moreouer the people that went before, and they that came after cryed, saying: Ho∣sanna to the sonne of Dauid, blessed is he that commeth in the name of the Lord, Hosanna in the highest. And when he was come to Ierusalem, all the City was mo∣ued, saying: Who is this? And the people sayd: this is Iesus the Prophet of Nazareth, a city of Galile. And Iesus went into the Temple of God, & cast out all them that sold and bought in the Temple, and ouerthrew the tables of the money chaungers, and the seates of them that sold Dooues, and sayd vnto them: It is written, my house shall be called the house of prayer, but ye haue made it a denne of theeues. ¶The second Sunday in Aduent. The Epistle. Roma. xv. WHat soeuer thinges are written aforetyme, they are written for our learning, that we through pacience and comfort of the scriptures, myght haue hope. The God of pacience and consolation, graunt you to bee lyke mynded one towardes another, after the ensample of
Christ Iesu: that ye all agreeing together, may with one mouth praise God the Father of our Lord Iesu Christ: Wherfore receyue ye one another, as Christ receiued vs, to the prayse of God. And this I say: that Iesu Christ was a minister of the circumcision for the truth of God, to confirme the promises made vnto the fathers, and that the Gentiles might praise god for his mercy, as it is writtē: For this cause I wil praise thee among the Gentils, and singe vnto thy name. And a∣gaine he sayth: Reioyce ye Gentils with his people. And againe: praise the Lord all ye Gentils, and laude him all ye nations together. And agayne Esay sayth: There shall bee the roote of Iesse, & he that shal ryse to raigne ouer the Gentiles, in him shal the Gentils trust. The God of hope fill you with al ioy and peace in bele∣uing, that ye may be rytch in hope through the power of the holy ghost. ¶The Gospell. Luke. xxi. THer shalbe signes in the sunne and in the moone, and in the stars: and in the earth, the people shall be at their wittes ende, thorow dispaire. The sea and the water shal roare, and mens harts shal faile thē for feare, and for looking after those thinges which shal come on ye earth. For the powers of heauen shall moue. And then shall they see the Sonne of man come in a cloude, with power and great glorye. When these thinges beginne to come to passe, then looke vp, and lift vp your heads, for your redemption draweth nye. And he shewed thē a similitude: Behold the Figtree, and al other trees: whē they shoote foorth their buds, ye see & know of your own selues that summer is then nie at hād. So likewise ye also (whē ye see these things
come to passe) be sure that the kyngedome of God is nye. Verely I say vnto you, this generation shall not passe, tyll all bee fulfyled. Heauen and earth shall passe, but my woordes shall not passe. ¶The third Sunday in Aduent. The Epistle. i. Cor. iiii. LEt a man this wyse esteeme vs, euen as the mini∣sters of Christ, and Stewardes of the secretes of God. Furthermore it is required of the Stewarde that a man be founde faythfull: with me it is but a very small thing that I should be iudged of you, eyther of mans iudgement: no I iudge not mine owne selfe, for I knowe nought by my selfe, yet am I not thereby iustified. It is the Lord that iudgeth me. Therefore iudge nothing before the time, vntyll the Lord come, which wyll lyghten thynges that are hyd in darknes, and open the counsayles of the hartes: and then shall euery man haue praise of God. ¶The Gospell. Math. xi, WHen Iohn being in prison heard the works of Christ, he sent two of his Disciples: and sayd vnto him: Art thou he that shal come, or do we looke for another? Iesus aunswered & said vnto them: Go, and shew Iohn agayne what ye haue heard and seene. The blinde receiue theyr sight, the lame walke, the leapers are clensed, and the deafe heare, the deade are raysed vp, and the poore receiue the glad tidinges of the Gospell: and happy is he that is not offended by me. And as they departed, Iesus began to say vnto the people concerning Iohn: What went ye out into the wildernes to see? A reede that is shaken with the wind? Or what went you out to see? A man clothed in
soft raymēt? Behold, they that weare soft clothing, are in kinges houses. But what went you out for to see? A Prophet? Verely I say vnto you, and more then a pro¦phet. For this is hee of whom it is written: Behold, I sende my Messenger before thy face, which shall pre∣pare thy way before thee. ¶The fourth Sunday in Aduent. The Epistle. Phillip. iiii. REioyce in the Lord alway, and againe I say re∣ioyce. Let your softnes be knowen to all men, the Lord is euen at hand. Be careful for nothing, but in all prayer and supplication let your peticions be ma∣nyfest vnto God, wyth geuing of thankes. And the peace of God (which passeth all vnderstanding) keepe your harts and mynds, through Christ Iesu. ¶The Gospell. Iohn. i. THis is the recorde of Iohn, when the Iewes sent Priestes and Leuites from Ierusalem, to aske him: what art thou? And he confessed and deny∣ed not, and said plainely: I am not Christ. And they as∣ked him, what then? art thou Helias? And he sayd: I am not. Art thou that Prophet? And he answered no. Then said they vnto him: what art thou, that we may geue an answer bnto thē that sent vs: What saiest thou of thy selfe? He said: I am the voice of a Cryar in the wildernes: make straight the way of the Lord, as said the Prophet Esay. And they which were sent, were of the Phariseis, and they asked him, and sayde vnto him: Why baptisest thou then, if thou be not Christ, nor Helias, neither that Prophet? Iohn answered thē saying: I baptise with water, but ther standeth one a∣mong you whom ye know not, he it is which though he came after me, was before me, whose shooe latchet I
am not worthye to vnloose. These thinges were done in Bethabara beyond Iordan, wher Iohn did baptise. ¶Christmas day. The Epistle. Hebrues. i. GOd in times past, diuersly & many waies spake vnto the Fathers by Prophetes: but in these last daies he hath spoken vnto vs by his own sonne, whom he hath made Heire of al things, by whom also he made the worlde. Which Sonne being the bryght∣nes of his glory, and the very image of his substaunce ruling al things with the word of his power, hath by his own person purged our sins, & sitteth on the right hand of the maiestie on hie: being so much more excel∣lent then the Angels, as he hath by inheritaunce obtei¦ned a more excellent name thē they. For vnto which of the Angels sayd he at any time: Thou art my Sonne this day haue I begotten thee? And againe, I wyl be his Father, and hee shall be my Sonne. And agayne, when hee bryngeth in the first begotten Sonne into the worlde, he sayth: and let all the Angels of God woorship hym. And vnto the Angels hee sayth: hee maketh hys Angels spirites, and hys Ministers a flame of fire. But vnto the Sonne he sayth: thy seate, O God, shall be for euer and euer. The scepter of thy kingdome is a right scepter. Thou hast loued righ∣teousnes, and hated iniquitie: wherfore God, euen thy God hath annoynted thee with oyle of gladnesse a∣boue thy felowes. And yu Lord in the beginning hast layde the foundation of the earth: and the heauens are the workes of thy handes. They shall perish, but thou endurest: but they all shall waxe olde as doth a gar∣ment, and as a vesture shalt thou chaunge them, and
they shall bee chaunged: But thou art euen the same, and thy yeares shall not fayle, ¶The Gospell. Iohn. i. IN the beginning was the word, and the word was with God, & God was the word. The same was in the beginning with God. Althings were made by it, & without it was made nothing yt was made. In it was life, & the life was the light of men: and the light shineth in the darknes, & the darknes comprehended it not. There was sent from God a man, whose name was Iohn. The same came as a witnes, to beare wyt∣nes of the lyght, that all men through him might be∣leue. He was not that light, but was sent to beare wit∣nes of the light. That lyght was the true light, which lyghtneth euery man that commeth into the world. He was in the worlde, and the world was made by hym, and the worlde knewe hym not. He came amonge hys owne, and his own receiued him not. But as many as receiued him, to them gaue he power to bee made the sonnes of God: euen them that beleued on hys name, whych were borne not of bloude, nor of the wyll of the flesh, nor yet of the wyll of man, but of God. And the same word became flesh, and dwelt among vs, & we saw the glory of it, as the glory of the onely begot∣ten Sonne of the Father, ful of grace and truth. ¶Saint Stephens day. The Epistle. Actes. vii. ANd Steuen being full of the holy Ghost, looked vp stedfastelye with his eyes into heauen, and sawe the glorye of God, & Iesus standing on the right hande of God, and sayde: beholde, I see the heauens open, and the sonne of man standing on the
right hande of God. Then they gaue a shoute with a loude voice, and stopped theyr eares, and ran vpon him al at once, and cast him out of the City, and stoned him. And the wytnesses layd downe their clothes at a yong mans frete whose name was Saule. And they stoned Steuen, callyng on, and saying: Lord Iesu receyue my spirite. And he kneeled down, & cryed with a loude voyce: Lord, laye not this synne to their charge. And when he had thus spoken, he fell a sleepe. ¶The Gospell. Math. xxiii. BEholde, I send vnto you Prophets and wise men, and Scribes, and some of them ye shal kil and cru∣cify, and some of them shall ye scourge in your Si∣nagogs, and persecute them from city to city, that vpon you may come all the righteous bloude which hath bene shed vpon the earth, from the bloude of righte∣ous Abell, vnto the bloud of Zacharias the Sonne of Barachias, whom ye slew betwene the temple and the aulter. Verelye I saye vnto you, all these things shall come vpon this generation. O Ierusalem, Ierusalem, thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest them which are sent vnto thee: how often would I haue gathered thy children together, euen as the Hen gathereth her Chicknes vnder her wings, and ye would not? Behold your house is left vnto you desolate. For I saye vnto you, ye shall not see me hence forth, tyll ye say: blessed is he that commeth in the name of the Lord. ¶Saint Iohn Euangelistes day. The Epistle. i. Iohn i. THat whych was from the beginning, whych we haue hearde which we haue seene with our eyes,
which wee haue looked vpon, and our hands haue handeled of the worde of lyfe. And the life appeared, and we haue sene, and beare wytnes, and shewe vnto you that eternall life which was with the Father, and appeared vnto vs. That which wee haue seene and heard, declare we vnto you that ye also may haue felow¦shyp with vs, and that our felowship may be with the Father and hys Sonne Iesus Christ. And this we write vnto you, that ye may reioyce, and that your ioye may be full. And this is the tidinges which we haue heard of hym, and declare vnto you, that God is lyght, and in him is no darknes at all. If we say we haue felowship wyth hym and walke in darknes, we lie, and do not the truth. But and if we walke in light, euen as he is in light, then haue we felowshyp wyth hym and the bloud of Iesus Christ hys Sonne, clean∣seth vs from al syn. If we say we haue no sinne, we de∣ceiue our selues, and the truth is not in vs. If we knowledge our synnes, he is faythfull and iust to for∣geue vs our synnes, and to cleanse vs from al vnrigh∣teousnes. If we say we haue not synned, we make him a lyer, and hys worde is not in vs. ¶The Gospell. Iohn. xxi. IEsus said vnto Peter, folow thou me. Peter turned about, and saw the Disciple whom Iesus loued folo¦wing (which also leaned on his breast at supper, and said Lord: which is he that betraieth thee?) When Pe∣ter therfore saw him, he said to Iesus: Lord, what shal he here do? Iesus said vnto him: if I wil haue hym to tary till I come, what is that to thee? Folowe thou me. Then went this saying abrode among the Bre∣thren,
that that Disciple should not dye. Yet Iesus said not to him: he shal not die, but if I wil that he tary tyl I come, what is that to thee. The same Disciple is he which testifieth of these thinges, and wrote these things and we know that his testimonie is true. Ther are also many other things which Iesus did, the which if they should be wrytten euery one, I suppose the world could not conteyne the bookes that should bee written. ¶Innocentes day. The Epistle Apoca. xiii. I Looked and lo, a lambe stood on the Mount Sion, and with him an .C. and .xliiij. thousand, hauing his name and hys Fathers name written in their fore∣heades. And I heard a voyce from heauen as the sound of manye waters, and as the voyce of a great thunder. And I heard the voyce of Harpes, harpynge wyth their Harpes. And they soong as it were a newe songe before the seate and before the .iiij. beastes and the elders, and no man could learne the songe, but the hundred fortie and foure thousand, which were rede∣med from the earth. These are they which wer not de∣filed with womē, for they are virgins. These folow the Lambe wheresoeuer he goeth. These were redeemed from men beinge the first fruites vnto God and to the Lambe, and in their mouthes was found no guyle, for they are without spot before the throne of God. ¶The Gospell. Math. ii, THe Aungell of the Lord appeared to Ioseph in a sleepe, saying: aryse & take the childe and his mo∣ther, & flee into Egipt, & be thou ther til I bring thee woord. For it wil come to passe yt Herod shal seeke
the Child to destroy him. So when he awoke, he tooke the childe and his Mother by night, and departed into Egypt, and was there vnto the death of Herod, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken of the Lord by the Prophet saying: Out of Egipt haue I called my sonne. Then Herode when he saw that he was mocked of the wyse men, he was exceeding wroth, and sent forth men of warre, and slew all the children that were in Bethe∣lem, and in all the coastes (as many as were two yeares old or vnder) according to the tyme which he had dili∣gently knowen out of the wise men. Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by the Prophet Ieremy, where as he said: In Rama was ther a voyce heard, lamenta∣cion, weeping and great mourning, Rachel weping for her children, and would not be comforted, because they were not. ¶The Sunday after Christmas day. The Epistle. Gala. iiii. ANd I say, that the Heire (so long as he is a chyld) differeth not from a seruant, though he be Lord of all, but is vnder Tutours and Gouernours, vntyll the tyme that the father hath appoynted. Euen so we also, when we were children, were in bondage vnder the ordinances of the world, but when the time was full come, God sent his sonne made of a woman, and made bond vnto the law, to redeme them which wer bond vn∣to the law, that we through election might receiue the in¦heritance that belongeth vnto the naturall sonnes. Be∣cause ye are sonnes, God hath sent the spirit of his sōne into your hartes, which cryeth Abba, Father, wherefore now thou art not a seruaunt, but a sonne: If thou be a sonne, thou art also an heire of God through Christ.
¶The Gospell. Math. i. THys is the booke of the generation of Iesus Christ the sonne of Dauid, the sonne of Abraham: Abra∣ham begat Isaac, Isaac begat Iacob, Iacob be∣gat Iudas and hys brethren, Iudas begat Phares and Zaram of Thamar, Phares begat Esrom, Esrom begat Aram, Aram begat Aminadab, Aminadab begat Naasson, Naasson begat Salmon, Salmon begat Boos of Rahab, Boos begat Obed of Ruth, Obed begat Iesse, Iesse begat Dauid the king, Dauid the king begat Salomon of her that was the wife of Vrie, Salomon begat Roboam, Roboam begat Abia, Abia begat Asa, Asa begat Iosaphat, Iosaphat begat Io∣ram, Ioram begat Osias, Osias begat Ioatham, Io∣atham begat Achas, Achas begat Ezechias, Ezechias begat Manasses, Manasses begat Amon, Amon be∣gat Iosias, Iosias begat Ieconias and his brethren, about the time that they wer caried away to Babilō. And after they were brought to Babylon, Ieconias begat Salathiell, Salathiel begat Zorobabel. Zorobabel be∣gat Abiud, Abiud begat Eliachim, Eliachim begat A∣zor, Azor begat Sadoc, Sodoc begat Achin, Achin be∣gat Eliud, Eliud begat Marthan, Marthan begat Ia∣cob, Iacob begat Ioseph the husband of Mary, of whom was borne Iesus, euen he that is called Christ. And so all the generations from Abraham to Dauid, are .xiiij. generations. And from Dauid vnto the captiuitie of Ba¦bilon, are .xiiij. generations. And from the captiuitie of Babilon vnto Christ are .xiiij. generations. The birth of Christ was on this wise: when his mo∣ther Marye was maried to Ioseph (before they came to dwel together) she was found with child by the holy
ghost. Then Ioseph her husband (because he was a righ¦teous man, & would not put her to shame) was minded priuelie to depart frō her. But while he thus thought, behold, the Angel of the Lord appeared vnto him in a sleepe saying: Ioseph, thou sonne of Dauid, feare not to take vnto thee Mary thy wife: for that which is concei∣ued in her commeth of the holy ghost. She shall bring forth a sonne, and thou shalt call his name Iesus, for he shal saue his people from their synnes. Al this was done that it might be fulfilled which was spoken of the Lord by the Prophet, saying: Behold a mayde shalbe with childe, and shall bring forth a sonne, and they shal call hys name Emanuel: which (if a man in∣terpret) is as much to say, as God with vs. And Ioseph assone as he awoke out of sleepe, did as the Angel of the Lord had bidden him, and he tooke hys wife vnto him, and knew her not, tyll she had brought foorth her fyrst begotten Sonne, and called his name Iesus. ¶The Circumcision of Christ. The Epistle. Roma. iiii. BLessed is that man to whom the Lord will not im∣pute syn. Came this blessednes then vpon the vn∣circumcision, or vpon the circumsicion also? For we say yt faith was reckoned to Abraham for righteousnes. How was it then reckoned, when he was in the circum∣cision, or when he was in the vncircumcision? Not in tyme of circumcision, but when he was yet vncircum∣cised. And he receyued the signe of circumcision, as a seale of the righteousnes of fayth, which he had yet be∣yng vncircumcised, that he should be the Father of all them that beleue, though they be not circūcised, that righ¦teousnes might be imputed to them also: and that he
might be the Father of circumcision, not vnto them one∣ly which came of the circumcised, but vnto them also that walke in the steps of the faith that was in our father A∣braham before the time of circumcision. For the promise (that he should be heire of the world) happened not to Abrahā or to his sede through the law, but through the righteousnes of faith. For if they which are of the law be heires, thē is faith but vain, & the promis of none effect. ¶The Gospell. Luke. ii. ANd it fortuned assoone as the Angels were gone away from the Shepheardes into heauen, they sayd one to another: let vs go euen now vnto Be∣thelem, and see this thing that we heare say is hapned, which the Lord hath shewed vnto vs. And they came with hast, and found Mary and Ioseph, and the Babe layd in a maunger. And when they had sene it, they pub¦lished abroad that saying that was tolde them of that child. And al they that heard it, wondred at those things which were told them of the Shepheards. But Mary kept al these sayings, and pondred them in her hart. And the Shepheards returned, praysing and lauding God for all thinges that they had heard and sene euen as it was told vnto them. And when the eight day was come, that the Childe should be circumcised, hys name was called Iesus, which was named of the Aungell before he was conceiued in the wombe. ¶The Epiphany. The Epistle. Ephes. iii. FOr this cause I Paule a prysoner of Iesus Christ, for you Heathen, if you haue heard of the ministrati∣on of the grace of God, which is geuen me to you ward. For by reuelation shewed he the mistery vnto me,
as I wrote afore in few woordes, whereby when ye reade, ye may vnderstand my knowledge in the miste∣ry of Christ, which mistery in times past was not ope∣ned vnto the sonnes of men, as it is now declared vnto his holy Apostels and Prophetes by the spirite: that the Gentiles should be inheritours also, & of the same bodye, and partakers of his promise in Christ, by the meanes of the Gospel, wherof I am made a Minister, according to the gift of the grace of God, which is ge∣uen vnto me after the working of his power. Vnto me the least of all Saintes is this grace geuen, that I should preache among the Gentiles the vnsearchable ritches of Christ, & to make all men see what ye felow∣ship of the mistery is, which from the beginning of the world hath bene hid in God, which made all thinges through Iesus Christ: to thentent that now vnto the rulers & powers in heauenly things might be knowen by the congregation the manifold wisdome of God, ac∣cording to the eternall purpose which he wrought in Christ Iesu our Lord: by whom we haue boldnes & entrance with the confidence which is by the fayth of him. ¶The Gospell. Math. ii. WHen Iesus was borne in Bethelem a City of Iewry, in the time of Herod the king: behold, ther came wise men from the East to Ierusa∣lem, saying: Where is hee that is borne Kyng of the Iewes? For we haue sene his starre in the East, and are come to worship him. When Herod the kyng had heard these thinges, he was troubled, and all the city of Ierusalem with hym. And when he had gathered al the chiefe Priests & Scribes of the people together, he demaunded of them where Christ should be borne.
And they sayd vnto him, at Bethelem in Iewry. For thus it is written by the Prophet: And thou Bethlem in the land of Iewry art not the least among ye Prin∣ces of Iuda: for out of thee there shall come vnto me the Captaine that shal gouern my people Israel. Then Herod, when he had priuely called the wyse men, he en∣quired of them diligently what tyme the starre appea∣red, and he bad them go to Bethlem, and said: go your way thether, and search diligently for the chylde. And when ye haue found him, bring me word agayne, that I may come and woorship him also. When they had heard the king, they departed, and loe the starre which they saw in the East, went before them, tyll it came and stood ouer the place wherin the child was. When they saw the starre, they were exceeding glad, and went in∣to the house, and found the child with Mary his mo∣ther, and fell downe flat, and worshipped him, and ope∣ned their treasures and offered vnto him gifts: gold, Frankincens and Mirre. And after they were warned of God in a slepe, yt they should not go againe to Herod: they returned into their owne countrey another way. ¶The fitst sunday after the Epiphany. The Epistle. Roma. xii. I Besche you therfore brethren, by the mercyfulnes of of God that yee make your bodies a quicke sacrifice, holy and acceptable vnto God which is your rea∣sonable seruing of God, and fashion not your selues lyke vnto this world: but be ye chaunged in your shape by the renuing of your minde, that ye may proue what thing that good and acceptable and perfecte wyll of God is. For I say (through the grace that vnto me geuē is) to euery man among you that no man stande high
in his own conceite, more then it becommeth him to esteme of himselfe: but so iudge of himselfe, that ht be gentell and sober, according as God hath dealt to euery man the measure of faith. For as we haue many members in one body, and al members haue not one office: so we being many, are one body, in Christ, and euery man among our selues one a nothers members. ¶The Gospell. Luke. ii. THe Father and Mother of Iesus went to Ierusa∣lem after the custome of the feast day. And when they had fulfylled the dayes, as they returned home, the Childe Iesus abode styll in Ierusalem and his father & mother knew not of it: but they supposing him to haue bene in the company, came a daies iourney and sought him amongest their kinsfolke and acquain¦taunce. And whē they found him not, they went back a∣gayne to Ierusalem, and sought him. And it fortuned that after three dayes they found him in the temple, sit¦ting in the middest of the Doctours, hearing them and posing them. And all that heard hym, wer astonied at his vnderstanding and answers. And when they saw hym, they merueiled, and his mother sayd vnto him: Sonne why hast thou thus dealt with vs? Behold thy Father and I haue sought thee sorowing. And he said vnto them: how happened that ye sought me? wist you not that I must go about my Fathers busynes? And they vnderstood not that saying which he spake vnto them. And he went down with them, and came to Na∣zareth and was obedient vnto them: but his Mother kept all these sayinges together in her hart. And Iesus prospered in wisedome and age, and in fauour with God and men.
¶The second sonday after the Epiphany. The Epistle Roma. xii. SEing that we haue diuers gyftes, according to the grace that is geuen vnto vs: if a man haue the gift of prophecy, let him haue it, that it be agreeing to the fayth. Let him that hath an office, waite on his office. Let him that teacheth, take hede to his doctrine. Let him that exhorteth, geue attendance to his exhor∣tacion. If any man geue, let him do it with synglenes. Let hym that ruleth, do it with cherefulnes. Let loue be without dissimulation. Hate that which is euil, and cleaue to that which is good. Be kynde one to another with brotherly loue: in geuing honor, go one before an other. Be not slouthful in the busynes which you haue in hand. Be feruent in Spirit. Apply your selues to the time. Reioyce in hope. Be pacient in tribulation. Conti∣nue in prayer. Distribute vnto ye necessity of the saynts. Be ready to harbour. Blesse them which persecute you: blesse I say, and curse not. Be mery with them that are mery, wepe with them that wepe. Be of lyke affection one towardes another. Be not hye minded, but make your selues equall to them of the lower sort. ¶The Gospell. Iohn. ii. ANd the third day was ther a mariage in Cana, a City of Galile, and the Mother of Iesus was ther. And Iesus was called (and his disciples) vn¦to the mariage. And when the wine failed, the mother of Iesus said vnto him: they haue no wine. Iesus said vnto her: woman, what haue I to do with thee: mine houre is not yet come. His mother said vnto the Mini∣sters, whatsoeuer he saith vnto you, do it. And there were standing ther .vi. waterpots of stone, after the ma∣ner
of purifiying of the Iewes, conteining two or three firkins apece. Iesus sayd vnto them: fill the waterpots with water. And they filled them vp to the brim. And he sayd vnto them: draw out now, and beare vnto the Gouernour of the feast: and they bare it When the ruler of the feast had tasted the water turned into wine, and knewe not whence it was (but the ministers which drew the water, knew) he called the bridegrome, and said vnto him euery man at the begynning doth set∣forth good wine, & when men be dronk thē that which is worse: but thou hast kept the good wine vntil nowe. This beginning of miracles did Iesus in Cana of Ga∣lile, & shewed his glory, & his disciples beleued on him. ¶The third sunday after the Epiphany. The Epistle. Roma. xii. BE not wise in your owne opinions. Recompence to no man euyll for euill. Prouide aforehande thinges honest, not onelye before God, but also in the syght of all men. If it be possible (as much as is in you) lyue peaceably with all men. Dearely beloued auenge not your selues, but rather geue place vnto wrath. For it is written, vengeaunce is mine, I wyll reward, sayth the Lord. Therefore, if thine enemy hunger, feede him, if he thirst, geue him drinke, For in so doing thou shalte heape coales of fire on his head. Be not ouercome of euill, but ouercome euil with goodnes. ¶The Gospell. Math. viii. WHen he was come down from the mountaine, much people folowed him. And behold there came a leper, and worshipped him, saying: Maister, if thou wilt, ye canst make me cleane. And Iesus put forth hys hande and touched him, saying: I wil, be thou cleane: & imme¦diatly
his leporsy was cleansed. And Iesus said to him tel no man, but go & shew thy selfe to the priest, & offer the gift (that Moises commaunded to be offred) for a witnes vnto them. And when Iesus was entred into Capernauin, ther came vnto him a Centurion, and be∣sought him, saying: Maister, my seruant lieth at home sick of the palsey, and is greuously payned. And Iesus sayd: When I come vnto hym, I wyll heale him. The Cēturion answered & said: Sir, I am not worthy that thou shouldest come vnder my roofe: but speake the word onely, and my seruaunt shalbe healed. For I also am a man subiect to the autority of an other, and haue souldiours vnder me, and I say to this man, go: and he goeth, and to another man, come, and he commeth, and to my seruant, do this, and he doth it. Whē Iesus heard these words, he maruayled, and said to them that folo∣wed him: verely I say vnto you, I haue not found so great fayth in Israel. I say vnto you, that many shall come from the East and West, and shall rest with Abra∣ham, Isaac, and Iacob in the kingdome of heauen, but the children of the kingdome shalbe cast out into vtter darknes, ther shalbe weeping & gnashyng with teeth. And Iesus sayd vnto the Centurion: go thy way, and as thou beleuest, so be it vnto thee, & his seruant was healed in the selfe same houre. ¶The fourth sunday after the Epiphany. The Epistle. Roma. xii. LEt euery soule submit himselfe vnto the aucthority of the higher powers, for there is no power but of God. The powers that be ar ordained of God, who soeuer therfore resisteth power, resisteth the ordinance of God, but they that resist shall receiue to them selues
damnatiō. For rulers ar not fearful to them yt do good, but to them that do euil. Wilt thou be without feare of the power? do wel then, & so shalt thou be praised of the the same, for he is the minister of God for thy wealth. But & if thou do that which is euil, thē fear, for he bea∣reth not the sword for nought: for he is the minister of god, to take vengeaunce on thē that do euil. Wherfore ye must nedes obey, not onely for feare of vengeaunce, but also because of conscience: & euen for this cause pay ye tribute, for they are Gods ministers seruing for that purpose. Geue to euery man therfore his duty: Tribute to whom tribute belongeth: Custom to whom custom is due: feare to whom feare belongeth: honoure to whom honour pertaineth. ¶The Gospell. Math. viii. ANd when he entred into a Ship, his disciples folo∣wed him. And behold ther arose a great tempest in the sea, in somuch as ye ship was couered with waues but he was a sleepe. And his Disciples came to him, & awoke him, saying: Maister saue vs, we perish. And he said vnto thē: why are ye fearefull, O ye of litle fayth? Then he arose, & rebuked the windes & the sea, & ther folowed a great calme. But the men marueiled saying: what maner of man is this, that both windes and sea obey him? And when he was come to the other side, into the country of the Gergesites, ther met with hym ij. possessed of Deuils, which came out of the graues, & were out of measure fierce, so that no man might go by that way. And behold, they cried out saying: O Iesu yu sonne of God, what haue we to do with thee? Art thou come hither to tormēt vs before ye time. And ther was a good wai of frō thē a herd of swine feding. So ye diuels
besought him, saying: if thou cast vs out, suffer vs to go into the herd of swine. And he said vnto them: go your wayes. Then went they out, and departed into the herd of swine. And behold the whole herd of swine was caryed headlong into the sea, & perished in the waters. Then they that kept them, fled and went their waies into the City and tolde euery thing & what had happe∣ned vnto the possessed of the deuils. And behold, the whole city came out to mete Iesus & whē they saw him they besought him yt he wold depart out of their coastes ¶The fift Sunday after the Epiphany. The Epistle. Philip. ii. PUt vpon you as the elect of God, tender mercy, kind¦nes, humblenes of minde, mekenes, long suffering, forbearing one another, and forgeuing one another if any man haue a quarell agaynst another: as Christ forgaue you, euen so do ye. Aboue all these thinges put one loue, which is the bond of perfectnes. And the peace of God rule your hartes, to the which peace ye are called in one body: And see that ye be thankefull. Let the word of Christ dwel in you plenteously with all wisdome. Teach and exhort your own selues in Psal∣mes and Himnes, and spirituall Songes, synging with grace in your hartes to the Lord. And whatsoeuer ye do in word or deede do al in the name of the Lord Iesu, geuing thankes to God the Father by him. ¶The Gospell. Math. xiii. THe kyngdome of heauen is lyke vnto a man which sowed good seede in the field: but while men slept, his enemye came and sowed tares amonge the wheate, and went his waye. But when the blade was sproong vp, and had brought forth fruit, then appeared
the tares also. So the seruants of the housholder came and sayd vnto him: Syr, didst not thou sow good seede in thy field? From whence then hath it tares? He sayd vnto them: the enuious man hath done thys. The ser∣uauntes sayd vnto hym: wylt thou then that we go and weede them vp? But he sayd naye: leaste while ye gather vp the tares, ye plucke vp also the wheate with them: let both grow together vntyll the haruest, and in the tyme of haruest I wyll say to the reapers, gather ye first the tares and bynd them together in sheaues to be brent, but gather the wheate into my barne. ¶The sunday called Septuagesima. The Epistle. i. Cor. ix. PErceyue ye not how that they which run in acourse, run all, but one receiueth the reward: So runne that ye may obtaine. Euery man that proueth maste¦ries, abstaineth from althings. And they do it to obtain a crown that shal perish, but we to obtain an euerlasting crowne. I therfore so run not as at an vncertain thing, so fyght I, not as one that beateth the ayre, but I tame my body, & bring it into subiection, least by any meanes it come to passe, that when I haue preached to other, I my selfe should be cast away. ¶The Gospell. Math. xx. THe kingdome of heauen is like vnto a man that is a housholder, whych went out earely in the morning to hyre labourers into his vineyard. And when the a∣grement was made with the labourers for a peny a daye, he sent them into hys vineyard. And he went out about the third houre & saw other standing idle in the market place, & sayd vnto them: go ye also into the vine∣yard, & whatsoeuer is ryght I wyll geue you. And they
went their way. Agayne he went out about the .vi. & .ix. houre, & did likewise. And about the .xi. houre he went out & found other standing idle & said vnto them: Why stand ye here al day idle? They sayd vnto him: because no man hath hired vs. He sayd vnto them: Go ye also into the vineyard, & whatsoeuer is right, that shal ye re¦ceue. So when euen was come, the Lord of ye vineyard said vnto his Steward: cal the labourers & geue them their hire, beginning at the last vntil the first. And whē they did come that came about the .ix. houre, they rece∣ued euery mā a peny. But when the first came also, they supposed that they should haue receiued more, and they likewise receiued euery mā a peny. And when they had receued it, they murmured against the good man of the house saying: These last haue wrought but one houre, and thou hast made them equall wyth vs which haue borne the burthen and heate of the day. But he answe∣red vnto one of them and sayd: Friende, I doo thee no wrong, didst thou not agree with me for a peny? Take that thyne is, and go thy way: I wyll geue vnto this last, euen as vnto thee. Is it not lawfull for me to do as me lusteth with myne owne good? Is thyne eye euyll because I am good? So the last shall be first, & the first shall be last. For many are called, but few are chosen. ¶The sunday called Sexagesima. The Epistle. ii. Cor. xi. YE suffer fooles gladly, seing ye your selues are wyse: for ye suffer if a mā bring you into bondage, if a mā deuour, if a man take, if a man exalt hym selfe, if a man smite you on the face. I speake as concerning rebuke, as though we had bene weake in this behalfe. Howbe∣it wherin soeuer any man dare be bolde (I speake foo∣lishly) I dare be bold also. They are Hebrues, euen so
am I. They are Israelites, euen so am I. They are the seede of Abraham, euen so am I. They ar the ministers of Christ (I speake like a foole) I am more. In labours more aboundant, in stripes aboue measure, in pryson more plenteously, in death oft. Of the Iewes fiue times receiued I .xl. stripes saue one. Thrise was I beatē with rods. I was once stoned. I suffered thrise shipwracke. Night & day haue I ven in the deepe sea. In iourneing often, in perils of waters, in perils of robbers, in ieoper∣dies of myne own natiō, in ieoperdies among the Hea∣then, in perils in ye city, in perils in wildernes, in perils in the sea, in perils among false brethrē, in labour & tra∣uel, in watchings often, in hunger & thirst, in fastinges often, in cold & nakednes, besyde the things which out∣wardly happen vnto me. I am combred dayly, & do care for all congregatiōs. Who is weake, & I am not weake? Who is offended, & I burn not? If I must nedes boast I wyl boast of the thinges that concerne mine infirmi∣ties. The God & father of our lord Iesus Christ which is blessed for euermore, knoweth that I lye not. ¶The Gospell. Luke. viii. WHen much people were gathered together, & were come to him out of al cities, he spake by a similitude. The sower went out to sowe hys seede, & as he sowed, some fell by the way side, & it was troden downe, & the foules of the ayre deuoured it vp, & some fel on stones, & assone as it was sprong vp, it withered away, because it lacked moistnes, & some fel amōg thornes, & the thornes sprāg vp with it & choked it, & some fel on good groūd, & sprāg vp & barefruit, an c. fold, & as he said these things he cried: He yt hath eares to heare, let him hear. And his disciples asked him saying: what maner of similitude is
And he said: vnto you it is geuen to know the secretes of the kingdom of God, but to other by parables, that whē they see, they should not see: & when they heare, they should not vnderstand. The parable is this: The seede is the word of God, those that are beside the way, ar they that heare: then cōmeth the deuil & taketh away the word out of their hartes, leaste they should beleue & be saued. They on the stones ar they which whē they heare, receiue the word with ioy, & these haue no rotes, which for a while beleue, & in time of temptacion go a∣way. And yt which fell among thorns are they, which when they haue heard, go forth and are choked with cares and riches, & voluptuous lyuing, and bring forth no fruite. That which fell in the good ground are they, which with a pure and good hart, heare the word and kepe it, and bring forth fruit through pacience, ¶The sunday called Quinquagesima. The Epistle. 1. Cor. xiii. THough I speake with toungs of men and of An∣gels, and haue no loue, I am euen as sounding brasse, or as a tinkling Cimbal. And though I could prophecy & vnderstand al secrets & al knowledge: yea if I haue al faith, so that I could moue mountains out of their places, & yet haue no loue, I am nothing. And though I bestow all my goods to fede the poore, & though I gaue my body euen that I burned, and yet haue no loue, it profiteth me nothing. Loue suffreth lōg, and is curteous, loue enuieth not, loue doth not fro∣wardly, swelleth not, dealeth not dishonestly, seketh not her own, is not prouoked to anger, thinketh none euil, reioyseth not in iniquity. But reioyseth in the truth suffreth al things, beleueth al things, hopeth al things,
endureth althinges. Though that prophecying faile, either tounges cease, or knowledge vanish away, yet loue falleth neuer away. For our knowledge is vnper∣fect, and our prophecying is vnperfect. But when that which is perfit is come, thē that which is vnperfit shal be done away. When I was a child, I spake as a child, I vnderstod as a child, I imagined as a child. But as∣sone as I was a man, I put away childishnes. Now we see in a glas, euen in a dark speaking: but then shal we see face to face. Now I know vnperfitly, but then shal I know euen as I am knowē. Now abideth faith hope & loue, euen these .iii. but the chief of these is loue. ¶The Gospell. Luke. xvii. IEsus tooke vnto him the .xii. and sayd vnto them: Behold, we go vp to Ierusalem, and all shall be ful∣filed that are written by the Prophets of the sonne of man. For he shal be deliuered vnto the Gentiles, and shalbe mocked, and despitefully intreated, and spytted on. And whē they haue scourged him, they wil put him to death, and the third day he shal rise again. And they vnderstood none of these things. And this saying was hid from them, so that they perceiued not the thinges which were spoken. And it came to passe, that as he was come nigh to Hierico, a certaine blynde man sat by the hie way side begging. And when he heard the peo∣ple passe by, he asked what it ment? And they said vnto him, that Iesus of Nazareth passed by. And he cried saying: Iesu thou sonne of Dauid, haue mercy on me. And they which went before rebuked him, that he should hold his peace▪ But he cried so much the more: thou sonne of Dauid haue mercye on me. And Iesus stood still, and commaunded him to be brought vnto
him. And when he was come neare, he asked him say∣ing: what wilt thou that I do vnto thee? and he sayd. Lord, that I might receiue my sight. And Iesus said vnto him: receiue thy sight thy sayth hath saued thee. And immediately hee receiued his sight, and folowed him praysing God. And all the people when they saw it, gaue praise vnto God. ¶The first day in Lent called Ashwensday. ¶The Gospell. Ioell. ii. TVrne you vnto me with all your hearts, with fas∣ting, weeping and mourning: rent your harts and not your clothes. Turne you vnto the Lord your God for he is gracious and merciful, long suffering and of great compassion, and ready to pardon wickednes. Then (no doubt) hee also shall turn and forgeue: and af∣ter his chastening, he shall let your encrease remaine for meate and drink off ringes vnto the lord your God. Blowe out with the trumpet in Sion, proclaime a fas∣ting, call the cōgregation, gather the people together: warne the congregation and gather the Elders, bring the children and Sucklings together. Let the bride∣grom go forth of his chamber, and the bride out of her closeth. Let the Priestes serue the Lord betwene the Porch & the aulter, weeping and saying: be fauourable O Lord, be fauourable vnto thy people, let not thine heritage be brought to such confusion, least the Hea∣then by Lords thereof. Wherefore should they say a∣mong the Heathen where is now their God? ¶The Gospell. Math. . WHen ye fast be not sad as the Hipocrits are: for they disfigure their faces that it may appeare vnto men how that they fast. Verely I say vn∣to
you, they haue their reward. But yu when thou fastest, anoint thine head, & wash thy face, that it appeare not vnto men how thou fastest, but vnto thy father which is in secret, and thy father which seeth in secret, shal re∣ward thee openly. Lay not vp for your selues treasure vpon earth, wher neither rust nor moth doth curupt, & wher theeues do not break thorow & steale, But lay vp for you treasures in heauē: wher neither rust nor moth doth corrupt, & wher theues do not break through nor steale. For wher your treasure is, there will your harts be also. ¶The first Sunday in Lent. The Epistle. ii. Cor. vi. WE as helpers exhort you, yt ye receiue not the grace of God in vaine. For he saith I haue heard thee in a time accepted, & in the day of saluation haue I succou∣red thee. Behold now is yt accepted time, behold now is that day of saluation. Let vs geue none occasion of euil that in our office be found no fault: but in al things let vs behaue our selues as ye ministers of god, in much pacience in affections, in necessities, in anguishes, in gripes, inprisonments, in strifes, in labours, in wat∣chings, in fastings, in purenes, in knowledge, in long-suffering, in kindnes in the holy ghost, in loue vnfained in the word of truth, in ye power of God: by the armour of righteousnes of the right hand and of the left: by ho∣nour & dishonour, by euil report & good report: as de∣ceiuers and yet true, as vnknowen and yet knowen, as dying, and behold we liue, as chastened and not killed, as sorowing & yet alway mery, as poore & yet make ma¦ny rich, as hauing nothing, & yet possessing althings. ¶The Gospell. Math. iiii. THen was Iesus led away of the Spirite into Wil∣dernes, to be tempted of the Deuyll. And when he
had fasted forty daies and forty nightes, he was at the last an hungred. And whē the Tempter came to him, he said: If thou be the sonne of God, commaund that these stones be made bread. But he answered & sayd: it is written, Man shall not lyue by bread onelye, but by euery woorde that proceedeth out of the mouth of God. Then the deuil taketh him vp into the holy city, and setteth him on a pinacle of the Temple, and sayth vnto him: If thou be the Sonne of God, cast thy selfe downe headlong. For it is written, he shall geue hys Angels charge ouer thee, and with their handes they shall hold thee vp, least at any time thou dash thy foote against a stone. And Iesus sayd vnto him, it is writ∣ten againe: Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God. Agayne the deuill taketh him vp into an exceding hye mountaine, and shewed him all the kyngdomes of the world, and the glory of them, and saith vnto hym: All these wyll I geue thee, if thou wylt fall downe & wor∣ship me. Then saith Iesus vnto him, auoyde Sathan, for it is wrytten: Thou shalt woorship the Lord thy God, & him onely shalt thou serue. Then the deuill left him: & behold the Angels came & ministred vnto him. ¶The second Sunday in Lent. The Epistle. i. Thessa. iiii. WE besech you brethren and exhort you by the Lord Iesus, that ye encrease more and more, euen as ye haue receiued of vs how ye ought to walke, & to please God. For ye know what commaundementes we gaue you by our Lord Iesus Christ. For this is the wyll of God, euen your holynes: that ye should abstayne from fornication, & that euery one of you should know how to keepe his vessel in holynes and honour, & not in the
lust of concupiscence as do the Heathen which know not God: that no man oppresse & defraud his brother in bargayning, because that the lord is the auenger of all such things as we tolde you before, and testified. For God hath not called vs vnto vnclennes, but vnto holy∣nes. He therefore that despiseth, dispiseth not a man, but God, which hath sent his holy spirit among you. ¶The Gospell. Math. xv. IEsus went thence, and departed into the coastes of Tyre and Sidon: and behold, a woman of Canaan (which came out of the same coastes) cryed vnto him, saying: haue mercy on me, O Lord, thou sonne of Dauid. My daughter is pyteously vexed with a deuill. But he answered her nothing at all. And hys disci∣ples came and besought him, saying: send her away for she cryeth after vs. But he aunswered, and sayd: I am not sent but to the lost sheepe of the house of Israel. Then came she and worshipped him: saying: Lord help me. He answered and said: It is not meete to take the childrens bread, and cast it to Dogs. She answered & sayd: Truth Lord, yet the Dogs eate of the croomes which fall from their maisters table. Then Iesus aunswered, and sayd vnto her: O woman, great is thy faith, be it vnto thee, euen as thou wilt. And her daugh¦ter was made whole, euen the same tyme. ¶The third sunday in Lent. The Epistle. Ephe. v. BE you folowers of God as deare chlldren, and walke in loue euen as Christ loued vs, and gaue himselfe for vs an offering & a sacrifice of a sweete sauour to God. As for fornication, and all vnclennes, or couetousnes, let it not be once named among you, as for
it becōmeth Saintes: or filthines, or foolish talking, or iesting, which are not comly, but rather geuing of thanks. For this ye know, that no whoremōger, either vncleane person, or couetous person (which is a woor∣shipper of Images) hath any inheritance in the king∣dome of Christ & of God. Let no man deceue you with vain words: For because of such things commeth the wrath of God vpon the children of disobedience. Be not ye therfore companions of them. Ye were sometimes darknes, but now are ye lyght in the Lord: walke as children of lyght, for the truth of the spirit consisteth in al goodnes, and righteousnes and truth. Accept that which is pleasing vnto the Lord, & haue no felowship with the vnfruitful workes of darknes, but rather re∣buke them. For it is a shame euen to name those things which are done of them in secrete: but all things when they are brought foorth by the light, are manifest. For whatsoeuer is manifest, the same is light, wherfore he saith: Awake thou that sleepest, and stand vp from death, and Christ shal geue thee lyght. ¶The Gospell. Luke. xii. IEsus was casting out a deuill that was dum. And when he had cast out the deuyll, the dumme spake, and the people wondered. But some of them sayd: he casteth out Deuyls thorow Belzebub the chiefe of the deuils. And other tempted him and required of him a signe from heauen. But he knowing their thoughts said vnto them: Euery kingdom deuided against it self is desolate: and one house doth fall vpon another. If Sathan also be deuided against him selfe, how shall his kingdome endure? Because ye saye I cast out de∣uils through Belzebub: if I by the helpe of Belzebub
cast out Deuils, by whose helpe do your children cast them out? therefore shal they be your iudges. But if I with the finger of God cast out deuils, no doubt ye king¦dome of God is come vpon you. When a strong man ar∣med watcheth his house, ye things that he possesseth are in peace: But when a stronger then he commeth vpon him, and ouercōmeth him, he taketh from him all hys harnes (wherin he trusted) and deuideth his goods. He yt is not with me is against me. And he that gathereth not with me, scattereth abroade. When the vncleane spirit is gone out of a mā, he walketh through dry pla∣ces seking rest. And when he findeth none, he saith, I wil returne againe into my house whence I came out, And when he cōmeth he fyndeth it swept & garnished. Then goeth he and taketh to him seuen other spirites worse then him selfe, & they enter in & dwel there. And the end of that man is worse then the beginning. And it fortuned that as he spake these things, a certain wo∣man of the company lift vp her voyce, & sayd vnto him: Happy is the wombe that bare thee, & the paps which gaue thee sucke. But he sayd, yea happy are they that heare the woord of God and keepe it. ¶The fourth sunday in Lent. The Epistle. Gala. iiii. TEll me (ye that desyre to be vnder the law) doo ye not heare of the law? For it is written, that Abra∣ham had two sonnes, the one by a bondmaid, the other by a freewoman. Yea, and he which was borne of the bondwoman, was born after the flesh: but he which was borne of the freewoman, was borne by promise: which thinges are spoken by an Allegorye. For these are two Testaments, the one from the mount Syna, which gendereth vnto bondage, which is Agar: For
mount Sina is Agar in Arabia, and bordereth vpon the city which is now called Ierusalem, and is in bon∣dage with hee children. But Ierusalē, which is aboue is free, which is the mother of vs al. For it is written, Reioyce thou barren that bearest no children, breake foorth & cry, thou that trauelest not: For the desolate hath many moe children, then she which hath an Hus∣band. Brethren we are after Isaac the children of pro∣mise. But as then hee that was borne after the flesh, persecuted him that was borne after the spirit: Euen so is it now. Neuertheles what sayth the Scripture? Put away the bondwoman & her sonne. For the sonne of the bondwoman shall not be heire with the sonne of the frewoman. So then brethren, we are not children of the bondwoman, but of the freewoman. ¶The Gospell. Iohn. vi. IEsus departed ouer the sea of Galile, which is the sea of Tiberias, & a great multitude followed hym, because thei saw his miracles which he did on them that were diseased. And Iesus went vp into a moun∣taine, & there he sat with his Disciples. And Easter, a feast of the Iewes was nye. When Iesus then lift vp his eyes, and saw a great company come vnto hym, he sayd vnto Philip: Whence shall we bye bread yt these may eate? This he sayd to proue him, for he him selfe knew what he would do Philip answered him: two hundreth penyworth of bread are not sufficient for them, that euery man may take a litle. One of his dis∣ciples (Andrew, Simon Peters brother) sayth vnto him: There is a Lad here which hath fiue barly loues & two fishes, but what are they among so many? And Iesus sayd: make the perple syt downe. There was
much grasse in ye place: so ye men sat down, in number about fiue thousand. And Iesus tooke the bread, and when he had geuen thanks he gaue it to the disciples, & the Disciples to them that wer set down, & likewise of ye fishes asmuch as they would. When they had eatē inough, he said vnto his disciples: gather vp ye broken meat which remaineth, yt nothing be lost. And they ga∣thered it together, & filled .xij. baskets with the broken meate of the fiue barley loues: which broken meate re∣mained vnto them yt had eaten. Then those men (when they had sene the miracle yt Iesus did) said: this is of a truth the same Prophet yt should come into the world. ¶The fift sunday in Lent. The Epistle. Hebru. ix. CHrist being an hie priest of good things to come, came by a greater and a more perfect tabernacle, not made with hands, yt is to say, not of this buil∣ding, neither by the bloud of Goates & Calues, but by his own bloud he entred in once into ye holy place, and found eternall redemption. For if the bloud of Oxen and of Goates, and the ashes of a yong Cowe, when it was sprinckled, purifieth the vncleane as touching the purifying of the flesh: how much more shall the bloude of Christ (which through the eternall spirite, offered him selfe without spot to God) purge your conscience from dead works, for to serue the liuing God? And for this cause he is the Mediatour of the new testament, that through death, which chaunced for the redemptiō of those transgressions that were vnder the first testa∣ment, they which are called, myght receiue the pro∣mise of eternall inheritaunce.
¶The Gospell. Iohn. vii. WHich of you can rebuke me of sinne: If I saye the truth, why do ye not beleue me? He that is of God, heareth Gods words: Ye therfore heare them not, be∣cause ye ar not of God. Thē answered the Iewes & said vnto him: say we not wel yt thou art a Samaritan, and hast the deuill? Iesus answered: I haue not the deuil, but I honour my father, & ye haue dishonoured me. I seeke not mine own praise: ther is one yt seketh & iud∣geth. Verely, verely. I say vnto you, if a man keepe my saying, he shall neuer see death. Then said the Iewes vnto him: now know we yt thou hast the deuil. Abrahā is dead, and the Prophets, & thou saiest, if a man keepe my saying he shal neuer tast of death. Art thou greater then our father Abraham which is dead? And the pro∣phets are dead: whom makest thou thy selfe? Iesus an∣swered: if I honour my selfe, my honour is nothing, it is my father that honoureth me, which you say is your God, & yet ye haue not knowen him, but I know him: & if I say I know him not, I shall be a lyer like vnto you. But I know him and keepe his saying. Your fa∣ther Abraham was glad to see my day: & he saw it and reioyced. Thē said ye Iewes vnto him: thou art not yet fyfty yere old, & hast ye seene Abraham? Iesus said vnto them: Verely verely I say vnto you: ere Abrahā was borne I am. Then tooke they vp stones to cast at him, but Iesus hid himselfe and went out of the temple. ¶The sunday next before Easter. The Epistle. Coll. iii. LEt the same mind be in you, that was also in Christ Iesu: which when he was in the shape of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with God, neuer∣theles he made himselfe of no reputaciō, taking on him
the shape of a seruant, & became like vnto man, & was found in his apparell as a man. He humbled him self, & becam obedient to ye death, euen the death of the crosse. Wherfore god hath also exalted him on hie, & geuē him a name which is aboue all names, that in the name of Iesus euery knee shuld bow both of things in heauen, & things in earth, and things vnder the earth, & that all tounges should confesse that Iesus Christ is the Lord, vnto the praise of God the Father. ¶The Gospell. Math. xxvi. ANd it cam to pas, when Iesus had finished al these sayinges, he sayd vnto his disciples: ye know that after .ij. dayes shalbe easter, & the son of man shalbe de∣liuered ouer to be crucified. Then assēbled together the chiefe priests & the Scribes & the Elders of the people vnto the palace of the hye Prieste (which was called Caiphas) & held a counsell that they might take Iesus by subtelty & kill him. But they said not on the holiday least ther be any vproare amōg the people. Whē Iesus was in Bethany in ye house af Simon the Leper, ther came vnto him a woman hauing an Alablaster boxe of precious ointmēt, & poured it on his head as he sat at ye bord: but whē his disciples saw it, they had indigna∣cion saying, wherto serueth this wast? This ointment might haue ben wel sold & geuē to the poore. When Ie∣sus vnderstood yt, he said vnto thē: why trouble ye the woman? for she hath wrought a good worke vpō me. For ye haue ye poore alwaies with you, but me ye shal not haue alwaies. And in yt she hath cast this ointment on my body, she did it to bury me: verely I say vnto you whersoeuer this gospel shalbe preached in al ye world, ther shal also this be told yt she hath don for a memori∣all
of her. Then one of the .xij. which was called Iudas Iscarioch went to the chiefe Priests & sayd vnto them: What wyl ye geue me, & I will deliuer him vnto you? And they appoynted vnto him .xxx. peeces of syluer. And from that time forth he sought oportunitye to be∣tray him. The first day of sweete bread, the Disciples came to Iesus, saying to him: Where wylt thou that we prepare for thee to eate the Passeouer? And he said go into the Citie to such a man, and say vnto him: the Maister sayth my time is at hand, I wyl keepe my Ea∣ster by thee with my Disciples. And the disciples dyd as Iesus had appointed them, and they made ready the Passeouer. When the euen was come, he sat downe with the .xii. And as they did eate, he sayde: Verely I say vnto you, that one of you shall betray me. And they were exceeding sorowfull, and began euery one of them to say vnto him: Lord is it I? He aunswered and said: he that dippeth his hand with me in the dish, the same shall betray me. The sonne of man truly go∣eth, as it is written of him: but wo be vnto that man by whom the Sonne of man is betrayed. It had bene good for that man, if he had not bene borne. Then Iudas which betrayed him answered & said: Maister is it I? He said vnto him: thou hast said, & when they were eating, Iesus tooke bread, & when he had geuen thanks he brake it & gaue it to the disciples and sayd: Take, eate, this is my body. And he tooke the cup, and thanked, & gaue it to them saying: drinke ye al of this: for this is my bloud (which is of the newe testament) that is shed for many, for the remission of sins. But I say vnto you, I wil not drinke hence forth of this fruit of the vine tree, vntil the day when I shal drink it new
with you in my fathers kingdome. And when they had said grace, they went out vnto mount Oliuet. Then sayd Iesus vnto them: all ye shall be offended because of me this night. For it is written: I wil smite the shep¦herd & the sheepe of the flocke shalbe scattered abroad, but after I am risen againe, I will go before you into Galile. Peter answered & said vnto him: though all men be offended because of thee, yet will I not be of∣fended. Iesus said vnto him: verely I say vnto thee, that in this same night, before the Cock crow thou shalt deny me thrise. Peter said vnto him: yea, though I should dye with thee, yet will I not deny thee: like∣wise also said al ye disciples. Then came Iesus with thē vnto a farme place (which is called Gerhsemane) and said vnto the disciples: Sit ye here while I go & pray yonder. And he toke with him Peter, & the two sonnes of Zebede, & began to waxe sorowful and heauy. Then said Iesus vnto them: My soul is heauy euē vnto the death. Tary ye here and watch with me. And he went a litle farther, & fel flat on his face and prayed saying: O my father, if it be possible let this cup passe from me, neuertheles, not as I wyll, but as thou wilt. And he came vnto the disciples, & found thē a sleepe, & said vn∣to Peter: what could ye not watch with me one hour? watch and pray that ye enter not into temptacion: the spirit is willing, but the flesh is weake. He went away once again and praied saying: O my father, if this cup may not pas away frō me except I drink of it, thy will be fulfilled: and he came & found them a sleepe againe, for their eies were heauy. And he left thē & went again & praied the third time saying the same words. Then cōmeth he to his disciples & sayd vnto them, sleepe on
now and take your rest. Behold, the houre is at hand, and the Sonne of man is betrayed into the handes of synners. Ryse, let vs be goyng: behold he is at hand that doth betray me. While he yet spake, loe Iudas one of the number of the twelue came, & with hym a great multitude with swordes & staues, sent from the chiefe Priestes & Elders of the people. But he that betrayed him, gaue them a token saying: Whom soeuer I kisse, the same is he, hold him fast. And forthwith he came to Iesus and sayd, hayle Maister, & kissed him. And Ie∣sus sayd vnto him: Friend, wherefore art thou come? Then came they & layd hands on Iesus, & tooke him. And behold, one of them that were with Iesus, stret∣ched out his hand, & drew his sword, and stroke a ser∣uant of the hye Priest, & smote of his eare. Then sayd Iesus vnto him, put vp thy sword into the sheath, for all that take the sword, shall perish with the swoord. Thinkest thou that I cānot now pray to my Father, & he shal geue me euen now more then xij. legions of An∣gels? But how thē shal the scriptures be fulfilled? For thus must it be. In that same houre sayd Iesus to the multitude: Ye be come out as it were to a theefe wyth swordes & staues for to take me. I sat dayly with you teaching in the temple, & ye tooke me not. But all this is done that the scriptures of the Prophetes myght be fulfilled. Then all the disciples forsooke him, and fled. And they tooke Iesus, & lead him to Caiphas the hye Priest, wher the Scribes and the Elders were assem∣bled. But Peter followed hym a farre of vnto the hye Priests palace and went in, & sat wyth the seruants to see the end. The chiefe Priests & Elders, and all the counsel sought false witnes against Iesus, to put him
to death, but found none: yea, when many false witnes∣ses came, yet found they none. At the last came .ij. false witnesses, & said: this felow said I am able to destroy the temple of God and to builde it again in three daies. And the chiefe priest arose, and said vnto him: answe∣rest thou nothing? Why do these beare witnes against thee? But Iesus held his peace. And the cheife priest answered & said vnto him. I charge thee by yt liuing God, that thou tel vs, whether thou be Christ the sōne of God. Iesus said vnto him: thou hast said: Neuer∣theles I say vnto you hereafter shall ye see the sōne of man sitting on the right hand of power, and comming in the cloudes of the skye. Then the hie priest rent his clothes, saying: he hath spoken blasphemy, what neede we of any more witnesses? Behold now ye haue heard his blasphemy, what thinke ye? They aunswered and said, he is worthy to dye, then they spit in his face, and buffeted him with fistes, and other smote him on the face with the palme of their hands saying: tel vs thou Christ, who is he that smot thee: Peter sat without in the courte, and a Damosell came to hym, saying: thou also wast with Iesus of Galile: but he denied before them all saying: I wot not what thou saiest. When he was gone out into the porch another wench saw him and said vnto them that were there: This felow was also wt Iesus of Nazareth. And again he deinied with an oth, saying I do not know ye mā. After a while came vnto him they yt stood by, & said vnto Peter surely thou art euē one of thē for thy spech bewraieth thee. Thē be∣gan he to curse & to swere, yt he knew not ye mā. And im¦mediately ye Cock crew: and Peter remembred ye word of Iesu which said vnto him before ye cock crow, thou shalt deny me thrise: and he wēt out and wept bitterly.
When the morning was come al the chief priests and Elders of the people held a counsell against Iesus, to put him to death, & brought him bound, and deliuered him vnto Poncius Pilat ye deynty. Thē Iudas (which had betrayed him) seeing that he was condemned, re∣pented him self, and brought againe ye .xxx. plates of sil∣uer to ye chiefe priestes and Elders, saying: I haue sin∣ned betraying the innocent bloud. And they said: what is that to vs? See thou to that. And he cast down the siluer plates in the temple, and departed and went and hanged himselfe. And the chiefe priests tooke the siluer plates, and sayd: It is not lawfull for to put them into the treasure, because it is the price of bloud. And they tooke counsaile, and bought with thē a potters field to bury straungers in. Wherfore the field is called Achel∣dema, that is, the fielde of bloud, vntil this day. Then was fulfylled that which was spoken by Ieremy the Prophet, saying: and they tooke .xxx. siluer plates, the price of him yt was valued, whom they boughte of the children of Israel, and gaue them for the potters field, as the Lord appointed me. Iesus stood before the de∣putie, and the deputy asked him saying: art yu the king of the Iewes? Iesus said vnto him: thou sayest. And when he was accused of the chiefe Priestes & Elders he answered nothing. Then sayd Pilat vnto him: hea∣rest thou not how many witnesses they lay agaynst thee? and he answered him to neuer a word, in so much yt the deputy merueiled greatly. At that feast the deputy was wont to deliuer vnto ye people a prisoner whō they would desire. He had thē a notable prisoner called Bar∣rabas. Therfore whē they wer gathered together, Pi∣lat said: whether wil ye yt I giue lose vnto you Barabas
or Iesus which is called Christ. For he knew that for enuy they had deliuered him. When he was set down to geue iudgemēt, his wife sent vnto him saying: haue thou nothing to do with that iust mā. For I haue suf∣fred this day may things in my sleepe because of hym. But the chief Priests & Elders perswaded the people that they should aske Barrabas & destroy Iesus. The Deputy answered & sayd vnto them: whether of the twayne wyll ye that I let loose vnto you? They sayd Barrabas. Pilate sayd vnto them: what shal I do thē with Iesus which is called Christ? They al sayd vnto him: let him be crucified. The Deputy said: what euil hath he done? But they cryed the more saying: let him be crucified. When Pilate saw that he could preuayle nothing, but yt more busynes was made, he tooke wa∣ter & washed his handes before the people, saying: I am innocent of the bloud of this iust person, ye shal see Then answered all the people & sayd: His bloud be on vs and on our children. Then let he Barrabas loose vnto them, and scourged Iesus, & deliuered hym to be crucified. Then the soldiours of the deputy tooke Ie∣sus into the common hall, & gathered vnto him all the company, and they stripped him, & put on him a purple robe, and platted a crowne of thornes, and put it vpon his head, and a rede in his right hand, and bowed the knee before him, and mocked him saying: Hayle kyng of the Iewes. And when they had spyt on hym, they tooke the reede and smote him on the head. And after that they had mocked him, they tooke the robe of hym againe, and put his own rayment on him, & lead hym away to crucify him. And as they came out, they found a man of Ciren (named Simon) him they compelled
to beare his crosse. And thei came vnto the place which is called Golgotha, that is to say, a place of dead mens sculs, & gaue him viniger mingled with gall to drynk. And when he had tasted therof, he would not drinke. When they had crucified him, they parted his garmēts and dyd cast lots, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the Prophet: They parted my garmentes among them, and vpon my vesture did they cast lots. And they sat and watched him there, & set vp ouer hys head the cause of hys death wrytten: Thys is Iesus the king of the Iewes. Then were there two theeues crucified with him, one on the right hand, & an other on the leaft. They that passed by reuiled him, wagging their heades and saying: Thou that destroyedst the temple of God, and diddest build it in three daies, saue thy selfe. If thou be the Sonne of God, come downe from the crosse. Likewise also all the hye Priests moc∣ked him, with the Scribes & Elders, and said: He sa∣ued other, him selfe he cannot saue. If he be the kyng of Israel, let him now come down from the crosse, and we wyl beleue him. He trusted in God, let him deliuer him now, if he wyll haue hym: For he sayd, I am the sonne of God. The theeues also which were crucified with him, cast the same in hys teeth. From the syxt houre was there darknes ouer all the land, vntyll the ninth houre. And about the nynth houre Iesus cryed with a loud voyce saying: Eloy, Eloy, Lamasabacthani? That is to say, My God, my God, why hast thou forsa∣ken me? Some of them that stoode there, when they heard that, sayd: This man calleth for Helias. And strayght way one of them ran & tooke a spoonge, and when he had filled it ful of viniger, he put it on a rede,
and gaue him drink. Other said: let be, let vs see whe∣ther Helias wyl come & delyuer hym. Iesus when he cried againe with a loud voice, yelded vp the Gost. And behold, the vaile of the temple did rent in two partes, from the top to the bottom, & the earth did quake, and the stones rent, & graues did open, & many bodies of Saints which slept, arose & went out of their graues after his resurrection, & came into the holy City, & ap∣peared vnto many. When the Centurion, & they that were with him watching Iesus, saw the earth quake, and those things that happened, they feared greatly saying: Truly this was the sonne of God. And many women wer ther, beholding him a far of, which folow∣ed Iesus from Galile, ministring vnto him. Among which was Mary Magdalen, & Mary the mother of Iames & Ioses, and the mother of Zebedes children. ¶The Monday before Easter. The Epistle. Esay. lxiii. WHat is hee thus that commeth from Edom, with red coulored clothes of Bosra (which is so costly cloth) & commeth in so mightely with all his strength? I am he that teacheth righteousnes, & am of power to helpe. Wherfore then is thy clothing red, and thy rayment lyke his that treadeth the wyne presse? I haue troden the presse my selfe alone, & of all people there is not one with me. Thus wyll I treade down mine enemies in my wrath, & set my feete vpon them in myne indignation. And their bloud shall be sprincle my clothes, & so wyl I stayne all my rayment. For the day of vengeance is assigned in my hart, & the yere when my people shalbe deliuered, is come. I loo∣ked about me, & ther was no mā to shew me any help.
I marueiled that no man held me vp. Then I helde me by mine own arme, and my feruentnes sustained me. And thus wlll I tread downe the people in my wrath, and bath them in my displeasure, & vpon the earth will I lay their strength. I wil declare the goodnes of the Lord yea and the praise of the Lord for al that he hath geuen vs for the great good that he hath done for Is∣rael, which he hath geuen them of his owne fauor, & according to the multitude of his louing kindnes: for he said these no doubt are my people, and no shrinking children, & so he was their sauiour. In their troubles he was also troubled with them, and the Aungel that went forth from his presence, delyuered them. Of very loue and kindnes that he had vnto them, he redemed them. He hath borne them & caried them vp euer synce the world begā: but after they prouoked him to wrath & vexed his holy minde, he was their enemy, & fought against them himselfe. Yet remembred Israel the olde time of Moises and his people, saying: wher is he that brought them from the water of the sea, with them yt fed his sheepe? Wher is he that hath geuē his holy spi∣rit among thē? he led thē by the right hand of Moses with his glorious arme, deuiding ye water before thē whereby he gat hymselfe an euerlasting name. He led them in the depe as an hors is led in the plaine, yt they should not stumble, as a tame beast goeth in the field, & the breath geuē of God, geueth him rest. Thus O god hast thou led thy people, to make thy selfe a glorious name with al. Looke down then from heauen, and be∣hold the dwellyng place of thy sanctuarye, & thy glory. How is it yt thy gelousy, thy strength, the multitude of thy mercyes, & thy louing kyndnes wyl not be entrea∣ted
of vs: yet art thou our father. For Abraham kno∣weth vs not, neither is Israel acquainted with vs: but thou Lord art our father & redemer, and thy name is euerlasting. O Lord, wherfore hast thou led vs out of thy way? wherfore hast thou hardened our harts yt we fear thee not? Be at one with vs again for thy seruants sake, and for the generation of thine heritage. Thy peo∣ple haue had but a litel of thy Sanctuary in possession: for our enemies haue trode down thy holy place. And we were thine from the beginning, when thou wast not their Lord, for they haue not called vpō thy name, ¶The Gospell. Mark. xiiij. AFter two dayes was Easter, and the dayes of swete bread. And the hie priestes and the scribes sought how they might take him by craft, and put him to death. But they said: not in the feast day, least any busines aryse among the people. And when he was in Bethany in the house of Simon ye Leper, euen as he sat at meate, there came a woman hauing an Alabaster box of ointment called Nard, that was pure and costly, & she broke the boxe and poured it vpon his head. And ther were some yt were not content within thēselues & said: what needed this wast of ointmēt? for it might haue bene sold for more then three hundreth pence, and haue bene geuen to the poore. And they grud¦ged against her. And Iesus said: let her alone why trou¦ble ye her? She hath done a good worke on me, for ye haue poore with you alwaies, & whensoeuer ye wil ye may do them good: but me ye haue not alwaies. She hath done ye she could, she came aforehād to anoint my body to the burying Verely I say vnto you, wheresoe∣uer this Gospel shalbe preached throughout the whole
worlde, this also that she hath done, shall be rehear∣sed in remembraunce of her. And Iudas Iscarioth one of the twelue went away vnto the hie Priestes to betraye him vnto them: When they heard that, they were glad and promised that they woulde geue him money. And he sought how he might conuenientlye betraye hym. And the first daye of sweete breade, (when they offred the passouer) his disciples said vn∣to him: where wilt thou that we go, and prepare that thou maist eate the Passouer? And he sent foorth two of his Disciples, and sayde vnto them: Go ye into the Citie, and there shal meete you a man bearing a pitcher of water, follow hym. And whether soeuer he goeth in, say ye vnto the good man of the house: the maister sayth were is the geaste chamber, where I shal eate ye passouer with my disciples? And he will shewe you a-great parlor pauid and prepared, there make ready for vs. And his disciples went and found as he had sayd vnto them: and they made ready the Passeouer. And when it was euentide, he came with the .xij. And as they sat at bord and did eate, Iesus sayd verely I say vnto you, one of you (that eateth with me) shall betray me. And they began to be sory and to say to him one by one: is it I? and an other saide: is it I? he aunswered and sayd vnto them: it is one of the .xij. euen he that dippeth with me in the platter. The Sonne of man truly goeth as it is written of him. but wo vnto that man by whom the Sonne of man is betraied: good were it for that man, if he had neuer bene borne. And as they did eate, Iesus tooke bread and when he had geuen thankes, he brake it and gaue it to them and sayd: Take, eate thys is my body. And he tooke the
cup, and when he had geuen thankes, he gaue it to them and they all drauke of it. And he said vnto them, this is my bloud of the new testament, which is shed for many. Verely I say vnto you: I wyll drinke no more of the fruite of the vine, vntill that day that I drinke it newe in the kingdome of god. And when they had said grace, they went out to the mount Oliuete. And Iesus said vnto them: all ye shalbe offended be∣cause of me this night. For it is written, I will smite the shephard and the sheepe shalbe scattered: but after that I am risen againe I wil go into Galile before you Peter sayde vnto him: and though all men be offen∣ded, yet wyll not I. And Iesus sayd vnto him: verely I say vnto thee, that thys day euen in this night, be∣fore the Cocke crowe twise thou shalt deny me three times. But hee spake more vehemently: no if I should dye with thee, I will not deny thee. Likewise also said they all. And they came into a place which is named Gethsemane, and he sayd to his Disciples: sit ye here while I go asyde and praye. And he taketh wyth hym Peter, Iames, and Iohn, and began to waxe abash∣ed and to be in an agony, and sayd vnto them: my soule is heauy euen vnto the death, tary ye here and watch. And he went foorth a litle and fell downe flat on the ground and praied, yt if it wer possible the hour myght passe from him. And he said: Abba father al things are possible vnto thee, take away this cup from me, neuer∣theles not as I wyll, but that thou wilt be done. And he came and found them sleeping, and sayd to Peter: Simon sleepest thou? Couldest not thou watch one houre? Watch ye and pray, least ye enter into tempta∣cion: the spirite truly is ready, but the flesh is weake.
And againe he went aside and praied, & spake the same words. And he returned and found them a slepe again for their eies wer heauy, neither wist they what to an∣swer him. And he came the third time and he said vn∣to them sleepe hence forth and take your ease, it is in∣ough. The houre is come: behold the sonne of man is betrayed into the handes of sinners. Rise vp let vs go Lo, he that betrayeth me is at hand. And immediately while he yet spake, cōmeth Iudas (which was one of the twelue) and with him a great nūber of people with swordes and staues frō the hie priestes and Scribes & Elders. And he that betraied hym, had geuen them a generall token saying: whosoeuer I do kisse, the same is he, take & lead him away warely. And assoone as he was come, he goeth straight way to him, and saith vn∣to him: Maister, maister, and kissed him: and they laid their hands on him, and tooke him: and one of them that stood by, drew out a sword, & smot a seruaunt of the hie prieste & cut of his eare. And Iesus answered & said vnto them: ye be come out as vnto a theefe with swordes and staues, for to take me: I was dayly with you in the temple teaching & ye tooke me not: but these things come to passe that the scripture should be fulfil∣led. And they al forsooke him and ran away. And ther folowed him a certain yong man clothed in linnen vpon the bare, and the yong men caught him, and he left his linnen garment and fled from them naked. And they led Iesus away to the hye priest of all, and with hym came all the hye Priestes and the Elders & the scribes. And Peter folowed him a great way of (euen till he was come into the palace of the hye priest) and he sat with the seruauntes, and warmed him selfe at the
fire. And the hie Priestes & all the counsell sought for witnes agaynst Iesus to put him to death, and found none: for many beare false wines against hym, but their witnesses agreed not together. And there arose certaine and brought false witnes against him saying: we heard him say, I wyll destroy this temple that is made wt hands, & within three daies, I wil build an o∣ther made without hands. But yet their witnesses a∣greed not together. And the hie priest stood vp among them, and asked Iesus saying: aunswerest thou no∣thing? how is it that these bear witnes against thee? But he held his peace, & answered nothing. Againe the hie priest asked him, and said vnto him: art thou Christ the sonne of the blessed? And Iesus said: I am. And ye shall see the sonne of man sytting on the right hand of power, and comming in the cloudes of heauen. Then the hie priest rent his clothes, and sayd, what neede we any further of witnesses? ye haue heard blasphemy, what thinke ye? And they all condemned hym to be worthy of death. And some began to spit at him, and to couer his face, and to beat him with fistes, and to say vnto hym: arede, and the seruants buffeted him on the face. And as Peter was beneath in the palace, there came one of the wenches of the hie priest, and when shee saw Peter warming hymselfe, she looked on hym and said: wast not thou also with Iesus of Nazareth? & he denied saying: I know him not, neither wote I what thou saiest. And he went out into ye porch, & the cock crew, and a damosell (when she saw him) began a∣gaine to say to them that stood by, this is one of them. And he denied it againe, & anon after they yt stood by said againe vnto Peter: surely thou art one of them, for
thou art of Galile, and thy speech agreeth therto. But he began to cursse and to sweare saying: I know not this man of whom ye speake. And again the cock crew, and Peter remembred the word that Iesus had sayd vnto hym: before the cocke crow twise thou shalt deny me three times And he began to weepe. ¶The Tuesday before Easter. The Epistle. Esay. i. THe lord God hath opened mine eare, therfore can I not say nay, neyther with draw my self: but of∣fer my back vnto the smiters, and my cheekes to the nippers. I turne not my face fro shame & spitting, and the lord God shall helpe me. Therefore shall I not be confounded. I haue hardened my face lyke a flynte stone, for I am sure that I shall not come to confusion. He is at hand that iustifieth me, who wyll then go to law with me? Let vs stād one against another: if ther be any that wil reason with me, let him come here forth to me. Behold, the Lord God standeth by me, what is he then yt can condemne me? Lo, they shalbe lyke as an olde cloth, ye moth shal eate them vp. Therfore who soeuer feareth the Lord among you, let him heare the voice of his seruant. Whoso walketh in darknes, & no light shineth vpon him, let him put his trust in yt name of the Lord, & hold him vp by his God: but take hede, ye al kindle a fire of ye wrath of God, & stir vp ye coales: walke on in the glistering of your own fyre, and in the coales that ye haue kindeled. This commeth vnto you from my hand, namely that ye shall sleepe in sorow. ¶The Gospell. Mark. xx. ANd anone in the dawning, the hie Priestes held a counsell wyth the Elders and the Scribes, and
the whole congregation, and bound Iesus and led him awaye, and delyuered him to Pilate. And Pilate asked him: art thou the king of the Iewes? and he aunswered and said to him: thou saiest it. And the hye Priestes accused him of many things. So Pilate asked hym agayne saying: aunswerest thou nothing? Be∣hold how many thynges they lay to thy charge. Iesus aunswered yet nothing, so that Pilate marueyled. At that feast Pilate did delyuer vnto them a prisoner, whom soeuer they would desire. And there was one that was named Barrabas, which lay bound wyth them that made insurrection: he had committed mur∣ther. And the people called vnto hym, and began to desire hym that hee would do according as he had euer done vnto them. Pilat answered them saying: wil ye that I let loose vnto you the king of the Iewes? for he knew that the hie Priestes had deliuered him of en∣uy. But the hie priestes moued the people that he shuld rather deliuer Barrabas vnto them. Pilate aunswered agayne and sayd to them: what wil ye that I then do vnto him, whom ye call the king of the Iewes? And they cryed againe, crucify him. Pilate sayd vnto them what euil hath he don? And they cried the more feruēt∣ly, crucify him. And so Pilate wylling to content the people, let loose Barrabas vnto them, and deliuered vp Iesus (when he had scourged him) for to be crucified. And the soldiours led him away into the common hall & called together the whole multitude, & they clothed him with purple, and they platted a crowne of thorns and crowned hym with all, and began to salute hym: haile kyng of the Iewes. And they smote him on the head with a rede and dyd spyt vpon hym, and bowed
theyr knees and worshipped him. And when they had mocked him, they tooke the purple of hym, and put hys own clothes on him & led him out to crucify him. And they compelled one yt passed by, called Simon of Ciren (the father of Alexander and Rufus) which came out of the field, to beare his crosse. And they brought him to a place named Golgotha, which if a man interprete, is the place of dead mens sculs: and they gaue hym to drinke wine mingled wyth mir, but he receiued it not. And when they had crucified him, they parted his gar¦ments, casting lottes vpon them what euery man should take. And it was about the third houre, & they crucified him. And the title of hys cause was written: The King of the Iewes. And they crucified with hym two theeues. the one on hys right hand, and the other on his left. And the scripture was fulfilled, which saith: he was counted amonge the wicked. And they that went by railed on hym wagging their heads & saying: a wretch, thou that destroiest the temple, and buildest it againe in three daies saue thy selfe and come downe from the crosse. Likewise also mocked hym the hie priestes among themselues with the Scribes, & sayd: he saued other, himselfe he cannot saue. Let Christ the king of Israel descende now from che crosse, that we may see and beleue. And they that were crucified with hym, checked hym also. And when the sixth houre was come, darkenes arose ouer all the earth, vntil the ninth hour, And at the ninth houre Iesus cried with a loude voice saying: Eloy, Eloy, Lamasabathany? which is (if one interpret it) My God my God why hast yu forsaken me? And some of them that stood by, when they heard that said: behold he calleth for Helias, and one ran and fil∣led
a sponge full of viniger, and put it on a reede, and gaue him to drinke, saying let him alone, let vs see whe¦ther Helias will come and take hym downe. But Ie∣sus cryed with a loud voice and gaue vp the ghost. And the vale of the temple rent in two peeces, from the top to the bottom. And when the Centurion (which stood before him) saw that he so cried & gaue vp the ghost, he said: truly this man was the Sonne of God. There were also women a good waye of beholding hym: a¦mong whom was Mary Magdalen and Marye the mother of Iames the litle, and of Ioses, and Marye Salome (which also when he was in Galile had folo∣wed him) and many other womē which came vp with him to Ierusalem. And now when the euen was come, (because it was the day of preparing that goeth before the Sabboth) Ioseph of the City of Aramathia a noble Counsaylour, which also looked for the kingdome of God, came and went in boldly vnto Pilate, and beg∣ged of him the body of Iesu. And Pilate marueyled that he was already dead and called vnto him the Cen∣turyon, and asked of hym whether he had bene any whyle dead: And when he knewe the truth of the Centurion, he gaue the body to Ioseph, & hee bought a lynnen clothe, and tooke him downe, and wrapped him in the linnen cloth, and laid hym in the Sepulchre that was he wen out of a rock, and roled a stone before the doore of the Sepulchre. And Marye Magdalene, and Marye Ioses behelde where he was layd. ¶The wedensday before Easter. The Epistle. Hebru. ix. WHere as is a testament, there must also (of necessi∣ty) be the death of hym that maketh the testament.
For the Testament taketh aucthority when men are dead: for it is yet of no value, as long as he that ma∣keth the Testament is aliue: for which cause also nei∣ther the fyrst Testament was ordeyned without bloud. For when Moises had declared all the com∣maundementes to all the people, according to the law hee tooke the bloud of Calues and of Goates, wyth water and purple wool, and isope, and sprinkled both the Booke and all the people, saying: Thys is the bloud of the Testament whych God hath appoynted vnto you. Moreouer hee sprinckled the tabernacle with bloude also, and all the ministring vessels. And almost all thinges are by the law purged with bloude, and without shedding of bloud is no remission. It is neede then that the similitudes of heauenly things bee purifyed wyth such thinges: but that the hea∣uenly thinges themselues, be purified with better sa∣crifices then are made with hands (which are simili∣tudes of true thinges) but is entred into very heauen, for to appeare now in the sight of God for vs: not to offer himselfe often as the hie Priest entreth into the holy place euery yeare with straunge bloud, for then must he haue often suffred since the world began. But now in the end of the world hath he appeared once to put sin to flight by the offering vp of hymselfe. And as it is appointed vnto all men that they shall once dye, and then commeth the iudgement: Euen so Christ was once offered to take away the syns of many, and vnto them that looke for hym, shall he appeare againe without sinne vnto saluacion.
¶The Gospell. Luke. xxii. THe feast of sweete bread drew nye, which is cal∣led Easter, and the hye Priestes and Scribes sought how they might kyll hym, for they feared the people. Then entred Sathan into Iudas, whose sir name was Iscarioth (which was of the number of the twelue) and hee went his waye and communed with the hie Priestes and officers how he myght be∣tray hym vnto them. And they were glad, and pro∣mised to geue him money. And hee consented and sought oportunity to betray him vnto them, when the people were away. Then came the day of sweete breade when of necessity the Passeouer must be offe∣red. And he sent Peter and Iohn, saying: go and prepare vs the Passeouer, that we may eate. They sayd vnto him: where wilt thou that we prepare? and hee sayd vnto them: behold, when ye enter into the City, there shall a man meete you bearing a pitcher of water, him folow into the same house that he entreth in, and ye shall say vnto the good man of the house: the maister sayth vnto thee: where is the gest chamber where I shall eate the passeouer with my Disciples? And hee shall shew a great parler pauid, there make readye. And they went and found as he had sayd vn∣to them and they made ready the Passeouer. And when the houre was come, hee sat downe and the twelue Apostles with hym. And he sayd vnto them: I haue inwardly desired to eate this Passeouer with you before that I suffer. For I say vnto you: hence∣forth wyll I not eate of it any more, vntyll it bee ful∣filled in the kingdome of God. And hee tooke the Cup, and gaue thankes, and sayd: Take this, and deuide it among you. For I say vnto you: I wyll not drynke
of the fruite of this vyne vntill the kingdome of God come. And hee tooke bread, and when he had geuen thanks, he brake it, and gaue vnto them saying: This is my body which is geuen for you, this do in the remē∣braunce of me. Likewise also when he had supped, he tooke the cup saying: Thys cup is the new testament in my bloud which is shed for you: Yet behold the hand of him that betrayeth me, is with me on the table. And truely the sonne of man goeth as it is appointed, but woe vnto that man by whom he is betrayed. And they began to enquire among them selues, which of them it was that should do it. And there was a stryfe a∣mong them, which of them should seeme to be the grea¦test. And he said vnto them ye kinges of nacions reigne ouer them, and they that haue aucthoryty vpon them are called gracious: but ye shall not so be. But he yt is greatest among you, shall be as the yonger, and hee yt is chiefe, shalbe as he that doth minister. For whether is greater he that sitteth at meat, or he that serueth? Is not he that litteth at meate? But I am among you, as he that ministreth. Ye are they which haue biddē with me in my temptacions. And I appointed vnto you a kingdome, as my father hath appointed to me, that ye may eate and drinke at my table in my kingdom, & sit on seates, iudging the twelue tribes of Israell. And ye Lord said: Simon, Simon, behold Satā hath desired to sift you as it were wheate, but I haue praied for thee that thy fayth fayle not. And when thou art conuerted, strength thy brethren. And he said vnto him: lord I am ready to go with thee into prison, and to death. And he sayd: I tel thee Peter, the cock shall not crow thys day til yu haue denied me thrise yt thou knowest me. And he
sayd vnto them, when I sent you without wallet, and scrip and shoes, lacked ye any thing? And they said no. Then sayd he vnto them: but now he that hath a wal∣let, let him take it vp, & likewise his scrip. And he that hath no sworde, let him sell his coate & bie one. For I say vnto you that yet ye same which is written, must be performed in me: euen amōg ye wicked was he reputed For those things which are written of me, haue their end. And they sayd Lord, behold here are .ii. swords, & he said vnto thē it is inough. And he came out & went as he was wont, to mount Oliuet, and the disciples fo∣lowed him. And when he came to ye place, he said vnto them, pray lest ye fal into temptacion. And he gat him selfe frō them about a stone cast, and kneeled down & praied saying: Father if thou wilt remoue this cup frō me: Neuertheles not my will but thine be fulfilled: & ther appeared an angel vnto him frō heauen cōforting him. And he was in an agony, & praied the longer, and his sweate was like drops of bloud trickling down to the ground. And when he arose frō praier, & was come to his disciples, he found them sleeping for heauines, & he said vnto thē: why slepe ye? Rise & pray, least ye fall into temptation. While he yet spake, behold ther came a cōpany, and he that was called Iudas, one of ye twelue wēt before them & preased nye to Iesus to kisse him. But Iesus said vnto him: Iudas, betraiest yu the sonne of man with a kisse? When they which were about him saw what would folow thei said vnto him: lord, shal we smite with the sword? & one of them smote a seruant of ye hie priest, & stroke of his right eare. Iesus answered & sayd: suffer ye thus far forth. And when he touched his eare he healed him. Then Iesus said vnto the hie
Priestes & rulers of the temple & the elders which wer come to him: Ye be come out as vnto a theefe, with swords and staues. When I was dayly with you in the temple, ye streatched forth no handes against me: but this is euen your very hour and the power of dark¦nes. Then tooke they him and led him, and brought him to ye hie Priestes house. But Peter folowed a far of. And when they had kinled a fire in the midst of the palace and were set down together, Peter also sat down amonge them. But when one of the wenches be helde him, as he sat by the fire (and looked vpon hym) she sayd: this same felow was also with him. And he denied him, saying: womā I know him not. And after a litle while, another saw him and said: thou art also of them. And Peter sayd man I am not. And about the space of an houre after, another affirmed, saying: verely this felow was with him also, for he is of Galile And Peter sayd, mā I wot not what thou saiest, & im∣mediately while he yet spake the Cock crew. And ye lord turned backe & looked vpon Peter. And Peter remem∣bred the word of the Lord, how he had sayd vnto hym, before the Cock crow, thou shalt deny me thrise: & Pe∣ter went out and wept bytterly. And the men yt tooke Iesus mocked him, & smot him, & when they had blind folded him, they stroke him on the face, and asked him saying: arede, who is he yt smot thee? And many other thinges dispitfully sayd they against him. And assoone as it was day, the elders of the people, & the hie pristes & Scribes came together, and led him into their coun∣sell saying: art thou very Christ? tell vs. And he sayd vnto them: if I tell you, ye wil not beleue me, and if I aske you, you wil not answer me nor let me go: hereaf∣ter
shal the sonne of man sit on the right hand of the po¦wer of God. Then said they al: art thou then the son of God? He sayd: ye say that I am. And they sayd, what neede we any further witnes. For wee our selues haue heard of his owne mouth. ¶The thursday before Easter. The Epistle. i. Cor. xi. THis I warne you of & commend not, that ye come not together after a better maner, but after a worse For first of al, whē ye come together in the cōgregation I heare yt ther is discention among you, & I partly be∣leue it. For there must be sectes among you, that they which are perfect among you may be knowen. When ye come together therfore into one place, the Lords sup¦per cannot be eaten, for euery man beginneth afore to eate his own supper, and one is hungry, & an other is dronken. Haue ye not houses to eate & drink in? despise ye the congregation of God, and shame them that haue not? What shall I say vnto you? shal I praise you? in this I praise ye not. That which I deliuered vnto you I receiued of the Lord. For the Lord Iesus, the same night in which he was betrayed, tooke bread, & when he had geuen thanks he brake it & said: Take ye & eate this is my body which is brokē for you. This do ye in remēbraūce of me. After the same maner also he tooke ye cup whē supper was don saying: this cup is ye new te∣stamēt in my blud, this do as oft as ye drink it, in remē∣braunce of me. For as often as ye shal eate this bread, & drink of this cup ye shal shew ye Lords death til he come Wherfore, whosoeuer shal eate of this bread & drinke of this cup of ye Lord vnworthely, shalbe gilty of ye body & bloud of the Lord. But let a man examine himselfe, and
so let him eate of the bread, and drink of the cup. For he that eateth & drinketh vnworthely, eateth & drinketh his own damnation: because he maketh no difference of the Lords body. For this cause many are weake and sicke among you, & many sleepe. For if we had iudged our selues, we should not haue bene iudged. But when we are iudged of the Lord, we are chastened, that we should not be damned with the world: Wherfore my brethrē when ye come together to eate tary one for an∣other. If any man hunger let him eat at home, that ye come not together vnto condemnacion: Other things wil I set in order when I come. ¶The Gospell. Luke. xxii. THe whole multitude of them arose, & led him vnto Pilate. And they began to accuse him saying: we found this felow peruerting the people, and for∣bidding to paye tribute to Ceasar, saying that hee is Christ a king. And Pilate apposed him saying, art thou the king of the Iewes? He answered him, & said: thou saiest it. Then said Pilate to the hie Priests and to the people: I fynd no fault in this man. And they wer the more fierce, saying: he moueth the people, teaching throughout all Iurye, and begā at Galile, euen to this place. When Pilate hearde mention of Galile, he asked whether the man were of Galile: & assone as he knew that he belonged to Herods iurisdiction, he sent him to Herod, which was also at Ierusalē at that tyme. And when Herod saw Iesus, he was exceding glad, for he was desirous to see him of a long seasō, because he had herd many things of him, and he trusted to haue seene some miracles don by him. Then he questioned wt him many words. But he answered him nothing. The hie
Priestes and Scribes stood forth and accused him straightly. And Herod with his men of war despised hym. And when he had mocked him, he araied him in white clothing and sent him againe to Pilate. And the same day Pilat and Herod were made Frendes toge∣ther. For before they were at variaunce. And Pilat cal∣led together the hie Priestes, and the rulers, and the people, and said vnto them: ye haue brought this man vnto me, as one that peruerteth the people, and behold I examine him before you, and finde no faulte in this man of those things whereof ye accuse him, no nor yet Herod. For I sent you vnto him, and lo nothing wor∣thy of death is done vnto him: I wyll therfore chasten hym, and let him loose. For of necessity he must haue let one loose to them at that feast. And all the people cried at once, saying: away with him and deliuer vs Barra∣bas: which for a certaine insurrection made in the city, and for a murther, was cast into prison. Pilate spake agayne vnto them, willing to let Iesus loose. But they cryed saying: crucify him, crucifye hym. He sayd vnto them the third time: what euill hath he done? I finde no cause of death in hym: I wil therfore chasten hym and let him go. And they cried with loud voices, requi∣ring that he might be crucified. And the voices of them and of the hie Priestes preuailed. And Pilat gaue sen∣tence that it should be as they requyred, and he let loose vnto them, him that (for insurrection and murther) was cast into prison, whom they had desyred: and he deliuered to them Iesus, to do with him what they would. And as they led him away, they caught one Si∣mon of Ciren coming out of the field, and on him laide they the Crosse, that he might beare it after Iesus.
And ther folowed him a great company of people, and of women, which bewayled and lamented him. But Iesus turned back vnto them and sayd: ye daughters of Ierusalem, wepe not for me, but wepe for your chil∣dren. For behold the daies wil come, in the which they shall say: Happy are the barren, and the wombes that neuer bare, and the pappes which neuer gaue sucke. Then shal they begin to say to the Mountaines, fal on vs, and to the hils couer vs. For if they do thys in a greene tree, what shal be don in the dry? And ther wer two euyll doers led with hym to be slayne. And after that they were come to the place (which is called Cal∣uery) there they crucified hym and the euyll doers, one on the right hand, and the other on the left. Then said Iesus: father forgeue them, for they wote not what they do. And they parted his raiment, and cast lottes. And the people stood and beheld. And the rulers moc∣ked him with them, saying he saued other men, let him saue him selfe, if he be vecy Christ the chosen of God. The souldiours also mocked him, and came and offered him viniger and said: if thou be the king of the Iewes saue thy selfe. And a superscription was written ouer him, with letters of Greeke, and Latin, and Hebrue. Thys is the king of the Iewes. And one of the euyll doers, which were hanged, rayled on him, saying: If yu be Christ, saue thy selfe & vs. But the other aunswered & rebuked him saying: fearest yu not God, seeing thou art in the same damnatiō? we are righteously punished for we receiue according to our dedes, but this mā hath done nothing amisse. And he sayd vnto Iesus: Lord remember me when yu commest into thy kingdom. And Iesus sayd vnto hym: verely I say vnto thee, to day
shalt thou be with me in paradise. And it was about the syxt hour, & ther was a darknes ouer all the earth, vntill the ninth houre, & the sun was darkned, and the vaile of the temple did rent, euē through the midst. And whē Iesus had cried with a loud voice, he said: Father, into thy hands I cōmend my spirit. And when he thus had said: he gaue vp the gost. When the Centurion saw what had happened, he glorifed God saying: verely this was a righteous man. And all the people yt came together to that syght, and saw the things which had hapned, smot their brestes and returned. And al his ac∣quaintance, and the women that folowed him frō Ga∣lile stood a far of beholding these things. And behold, ther was a man named Ioseph a Counsailer, & he was a good man and a iust, the same had not consented to the counsell & deede of them, which was of Aramathia a City of the Iewes, which also wayted for the king∣dome of God: he went vnto Pilat, and begged the body of Iesus, and tooke it down & wrapped it in a lynnen cloth, and laid it in a sepulchre that was hewē in stone wherein neuer man before had bene laid. And that day was the preparing of the Sabboth, and the Saboth drew on. The women that followed after, which had come with him from Galile beheld the sepulchre, & how hys body was layd. And they returned and prepared swete odours and oyntments, but rested on the Sab∣both day, according to the commaundementes. ¶Good Friday. The Epistle. Hebru. x. THe law which hath but a shadow of good things to come, and not the very fashyon of things them selues, can neuer with those Sacrifyces, which
they offer yeare by yeare continually, make the com∣mers therunto perfite. For would not then those Sa∣crifices haue ceased to haue bene offered, because that the offerers once purged should haue had no more conscience of synnes. Neuertheles, in those Sacrifices is ther mencion made of synnes euery yeare. For the bloud of Oxen and Goates cannot take away synnes. Wherfore when he commeth into the world, he sayth: Sacrifice and offering thou wouldest not haue, but a body hast thou ordained me. Burnt offeringes also for sinne hast thou not allowed. Then sayd I: lo I am here. In the beginning of the booke it is written of me, that I should do thy wyll, O God. Aboue, when he saith: Sacrifice and offering, and burnt sacrifices, and sinne offeringes thou wouldest not haue, neither hast thou alowed them (which yet are offered by the law) then sayd he: Loe, I am here to do thy wyll, O God: He taketh away the fyrst to establish the latter, by the which wyll we are made holye, euen by the offering of the body of Iesu Christ once for all. And euery Priest is ready daylye ministring and offering often tymes one manner of oblation, which can neuer take away syns. But thys man after he had offered one sacrifice for syns, is set down for euer on the right hand of God and from henceforth tarieth tyll his foes be made hys footestole. For with one offering hath he made perfect for euer them that are sanctified. The holy Ghost him selfe also beareth vs record euen when he told before: Thys is the Testament that I wyll make vnto them. After those daies (sayth the Lord) I wil put my lawes in their hartes, and in their minds wyl I write them, and theyr synnes and iniquities wyll I remember no∣more.
And where remission of these things is, there is no more offering for syns. Seing therefore brethren that by the meanes of the bloud of Iesu, we haue liber∣ty to enter into the holy place by the new and liuing way, which he hath prepared for vs, through the vaile that is to say by his flesh. And seing also that we haue an hie priest which is ruler ouer the house of God, let vs draw nye with a true hart in a sure fayth, sprinckled in our harts from an euil conscience, and washed in our bo∣dies with pure water: let vs keepe the profession of our hope without wauering (for he is faithfull that promi∣sed) & let vs consider one another, to the entent that we may prouoke vnto loue, & to good works, not forsaking the felowship that we haue among our selues as the maner of some is, but let vs exhort one another, & that so much the more because ye see yt the day draweth nie. ¶The Gospell. Iohn. xviii. WHen Iesus had spoken these words, he went forth with his disciples ouer the broke Cedron wher was a garden, into the which he then en∣tred with his disciples. Iudas which also betraied him knew the place: for Iesus oft times resorted thether with his Disciples. Iudas then after he had receiued a band of men (& ministers of the hye priests & Phari∣sies) came thether with lanterns, and fyrebrands, and weapons. And Iesus knowing all things that should come on him, went foorth and sayd vnto them: whom seeke ye? They aunswered him: Iesus of Nazareth. Iesus said vnto them: I am he. Iudas also which be∣trayed him, stood with them. Assone thē as he had said vnto them: I am he, they went backward & fell to the ground. Then asked he them againe: Whom seeke ye?
They sayd, Iesus of Nazareth. Iesus aunswered, I haue told you that I am he. If ye seeke me therfore, let these go their way, that the saying myght be fulfylled which he spake: Of them which thou gauest me, haue I not lost one. Then Simon Peter hauing a sword, drew it, & smote the hie Priests seruaunt, and cut of his right eare. The seruantes name was Malchus. Ther¦fore sayd Iesus vnto Peter, put vp thy sword into thy sheath: shall I not drinke of the cup which my father hath geuen me? Then the company & the captayn, and the ministers of the Iewes tooke Iesus & bound him, and led him away to Annas first, for he was father in law to Caiphas, which was the hie priest ye same yere. Caiphas was he that gaue counsel to the Iewes, that it was expedient that one man should die for ye people. And Simon Peter folowed Iesus, & so dyd another Disciple, that disciple was knowen to the hie priest, & went in with Iesus into the palace of the hye Priest. But Peter stood at the doore without. Then went out that other Disciple (which was knowen to the hye priest) and spake to the damosel that kept the doore, & brought in Peter. Then said the damosel that kept the doore vnto Peter: art not thou also one of this mans disciples? He said, I am not. The seruants & ministers stood ther, which made a fire of coales, for it was cold, & they warmed them selues. Peter also stood among thē and warmed him self. The hie priest then asked Iesus of his disciples & of his doctrine. Iesus answered him: I spake openly in the world, I euer taught in the Si∣nagoge, & in the temple whither al the Iewes haue re∣sorted, and in secret haue I sayd nothyng: Why askest thou me? Aske thē which heard me, what I said vnto
them. Behold they can tell what I said. When he had thus spoken, one of the ministers which stood by, smot Iesus on the face, saying: answerest thou the hie priest so? Iesus answered him: if I haue euil spoken, beare wytnes of the euill, but if I haue well spoken, why smitest thou me? And Annas sent him bound vnto Caiphas the hye Priest. Simon Peter stood and war∣med himselfe. Then sayd they vnto hym: art not thou also one of hys disciples? He denyed it and sayd: I am not. One of the seruants of the hye priestes (his cosyn whose eare Peter smote of) sayd vnto him: did not I see thee in the garden with him? Peter therfore deni∣ed againe, and immediatly the Cock crew. Then led they Iesus from Caiphas into the hall of iudgement. It was in the morning, & they them selues went not in to the iudgement hall, least they shuld be defiled, but yt they might eate the Passeouer. Pilat then went out to them, & said: What accusation bring you agaynst thys man? They answered & said vnto him: if he were not an euyll doer, we would not haue deliuered hym vnto thee? Then said Pilat vnto them: take ye him & iudge him after your own law. The Iewes therfore said vn¦to him: it is not lawful for vs to put any man to death, that the wordes of Iesus might be fulfilled which he spake, signifiyng what death he should dye. Thē Pilat entred into the iudgement hall againe, & called Iesus, & said vnto him: Art yu the king of the Iewes? Iesus answered: saiest thou that of thy selfe, or did other tell it thee of me? Pilat answered: am I a Iew? Thyne own nation & hie priests haue deliuered thee vnto me, what hast thou done? Iesus answered my kingdome is not of this world. If my kyngdome were of thys
world, then would my ministers surely fight, that I should not be deliuered to the Iewes, but now is my kingdome not from hence. Pilate therefore sayd vnto him: Art thou a kyng then? Iesus aunswered: thou sayest that I am a kyng. For this cause was I borne, & for this cause came I into the world, that I should beare witnes vnto the truth. And al yt are of the truth heare my voice. Pilate sayd vnto him: what thyng is truth? And when he had said this, he went out againe to the Iewes, & said vnto them: I find in him no cause at all. Ye haue a custome that I should deliuer you one loose at Easter, wyl ye that I lose vnto you the king of the Iewes? Then cried they all agayne saying: Not hym, but Barrabas: the same Barrabas was a mur∣therer. Then Pilate tooke Iesus therfore & scourged him. And the soldiours wound a crowne of thornes, & put it on his head. And they dyd on him a purple gar∣ment, & came vnto him & said: Haile king of ye Iewes, & they smote him on the face. Pilat went forth agayne and said vnto them: behold I bring him forth to you, that ye may know that I finde no fault in him. Then came Iesus forth, wearing a crowne of thorne, and a robe of purple. And he said vnto them: behold ye man. When the Priestes therfore & the ministers saw hym, they cryed: Crucify him, crucify him. Pilate sayd vnto them: take ye him & crucify him, for I finde no cause in him. The Iewes answered him, we haue a law, & by our law he ought to dye, because he made him selfe the sonne of God. When Pilat heard that saying, he was the more afraid, and went againe into the iudgement hall, & sayd vnto Iesus, whence art thou? But Iesus gaue him none answer. Then sayd Pilate vnto hym:
Speakest thou not vnto me? Knowest thou not that I haue power to crucify thee, and haue power to loose thee? Iesus answered, thou couldest haue no power at all agaynst me, except it were geuen thee from aboue. Therfore he that deliuered me vnto thee, hath ye more synne. And from thenceforth sought Pilate meanes to lose him: but ye Iewes cried saying, if thou let him go, thou art not Cesars friend: for whosoeuer maketh him self a king, is against Cesar. Whē Pilat heard that say∣ing, he brought Iesus forth, & sat downe to geue sen∣tence, in a place that is called the Pauement, but in the Hebrue toūg Gabbatha. It was the preparyng day of Easter, about the sixt hour. And he said vnto ye Iewes, behold your king. They cryed saying: away with him, away with him, crucify hym. Pilate sayd vnto them: shal I crucify your king? The hye priestes answered: we haue no king but Cesar. Then deliuered he him to them to be crucified. And they tooke Iesus, & led him away, and he bare his crosse, & went forth into a place which is called the place of dead mens sculs, but in He∣brue Golgotha, wher they crucified him, and two other with him, on either side one, & Iesus in the midst. And Pilat wrote a title, & put it vpon ye crosse. The writing was: Iesus of Nazareth king of the Iewes. Thys title read many of ye Iewes, for the place wher Iesus was crucified, was nere to the city. And it was writ∣ten in Hebrue, Greeke & Latin. Then said ye hie priests of the Iewes to Pilate, write not king of the Iewes, but that he sayd, I am king of the Iewes. Pilate an∣swered: what I haue written, that haue I wrytten. Then the soldiours when they had crucified Iesus, tooke his garments, & made foure parts to euery sol∣diour
a part, and also hys coate. The coate was with∣out seame, wrought vpon throughout. They said ther∣fore among themselues: let vs not deuide it, but cast lottes for it who shall haue it, that the scripture might be fulfilled, saying: They haue parted my rayment a∣mong them, and for my coate did they cast lots. And the soldiours did such things in deede. There stood by the crosse of Iesus, his mother, & his mothers sister, Ma∣ry the wyfe of Cleophas and Mary Magdalen. When Iesus therfore saw his mother, and the disciple whom he loued, standing, he saith vnto his mother: woman, behold thy sonne. Then said he to the disciple: behold thy mother, and from that houre the disciple tooke her for his owne. After these things, Iesus knowing that althings wer now perfourmed, that ye scripture might be fulfilled, he saith I thirst. So there stood a vessell by ful of vineger, therefore they filled a sponge with vine∣ger and wound it about with isope, and put it to his mouth. Assoone as Iesus then receiued of the vineger, he said: it is finished, and bowed his head and gaue vp the ghost. The Iewes therfore, because it was the pre∣paring of the Sabboth, that the bodies should not re∣maine vpon the cros on the Sabboth day (for the Sa∣both day was an hie day) besought Pilat that their legs might be broken, and that they might be taken down. Then came the soldiours and brake the legs of the first, & of the other which was crucified with him. But when they came to Iesus, and saw that he was dead already, they brake not his legs: but one of the soldiours with a spare thrust him into the syde, & forth with, there came out bloud & water. And he that saw it bare record, & his record is true. And he knoweth that
he saith true, that ye might beleue also. For these things wer done that the scripture should be fulfilled: ye shall not breake a bone of him. And againe another scripture saith: they shall looke vpon him whom they haue pear∣sed. After thys Ioseph of Aramathia (which was a dis∣ciple of Iesus, but secretly for feare of the Iewes) be∣sought Pilat yt he might take down the body of Iesus And Pilat gaue him licence. He came therfore & tooke yt body of Iesus, & there came also Nicodemus (which at ye beginning came to Iesus by night) & brought of myr and aloes mingled together about an hundreth pounde weight. Then tooke they the body of Iesus, & wound it in linnē clothes with ye odours, as the maner of ye Iewes is to bury. And in the place where he was crucified, ther was a gardē, & in the garden a new Se∣pulchre, wherin was neuer mā laid. Ther laid they Ie∣sus therfore, because of the preparing of the Sabboth of the Iewes, for the sepulchre was nie at hand. ¶Easter euen. The Epistle. i. Peter. iii. IT is better if the wyl of God be so, that ye suffer for wel doing, thē for euil doing. For as much as Christ hath once suffred for syns, the iust for the vniust, to bring vs to God, and was killed as partayning to the flesh, but was quickened in the spirit. In which spirit he also went & preached to the spirits that were in pri∣son, which somtime had bene disobedient, whē the long suffering of God was once looked for in ye daies of Noe while the Arke was a preparing: wherin a few, that is to say, eight soules were saued by the water, lyke as Baptisme also now saueth vs: not the putting awaye of the fylth of the fleshe, but in that a good
conscience cōsenteth to God by the resurrectiō of Iesus Christ, which is on the right hand of God, & is gone in to heauen, angels, powers & might subdued vnto him. ¶The Gospell. Math. xxvii. WHen the euen was come, there came a ritch man of Aramathia named Ioseph, which also was Iesus Disciple. He went vnto Pilate and begged the body of Iesus. Then Pilat commaunded the body to be deli∣uered. And when Ioseph had taken the body, he wrap∣ped it in a cleane linnē cloth, & laid it in his new toumbe which he had hewen out, euen in the rock, and roled a great stone to the doore of the Sepulchre & departed. And there was Mary Magdalen and the other Ma∣ry sitting ouer against the Sepulchre. The next day yt foloweth the day of preparing, the hie Priestes and Phariseis came together vnto Pilat saying: Syr, we remember that this deceiuer said while he was yet a∣liue: after three dayes I will rise againe. Commaund therfore that the sepulchre be made sure vntill the third day, least his disciples come and steale him away, and the last errour shall be worse then the first. Pilat sayd vnto them: ye haue a watch, go your way, make it as sure as ye can So they went and made the Sepulchre sure with the watch men, and sealed the stone. ¶Easter day. The Epistle. Colo. iiii. IF ye be rysen againe with Christ, seeke those things which are aboue, where Chrlst sitteth on the right hand of God. Set your affection on heauenly things & not on earthly things. For ye are dead, & your life is hid wt Christ in God, whensoeuer Christ which is our lyfe, shal shew him selfe, then shall ye also appeare with
hym in glorye. Mortifie therefore your earthly mem∣bers, fornication vnclennes, vnnatural lust, euil concu∣piscence and couetousnes, which is woorshipping of idols: for which thinges sake the wrath of God vseth to come on the children of vnbeleefe, among whom ye walked sometime when ye lyued in them. ¶The Gospell. Iohn. xx. THe first day of the sabbothes, came Mary Mag∣dalen earely (when it was yet darke) vnto the Sepulchre, and saw the stone taken away from the graue. Then shee ran and came to Simon Peter, and to the other disciple whom Iesus loued, and sayth vnto them: they haue taken away the Lord out of the graue, and we cannot tell where they haue layd hym. Peter therfore went foorth and that other disciple, and came vnto the Sepulchre. They ran both together, and that other disciple did out run Peter, and came first to the Sepulchre. And when he had stouped down he saw the linnen clothes lying, yet went hee not in. Then came Simon Peter folowing him, and went in∣to the Sepulchre, and saw the linnen clothes lie, and the napkin that was about hys heade not lying with the linnen clothes, but wrapped together in a place by it selfe. Then went in also that other Disciple which came first to the Sepulchre, and he saw and beleued. For as yet they knew not the scripture that he should rise againe from death. Then the Dlsciples went a∣way againe to their owne home. ¶The Monday in Easter weeke. The Epistle. Actes. x. PEter opened his mouth, and said: of a truth I per∣ceiue that there is no respect of persons with God:
but in al people, he that feareth him and worketh righ∣teousnes, is accepted with him. Ye know the preaching that God sent vnto the children of Israell, preaching peace by Iesus Christ which is Lord ouer all things: which preaching was published throughout al Iewry (and began in Galile, after the Baptisme which Iohn preached) how God annoynted Iesus of Nazareth with the holy ghost & with power. Which Iesus went about doing good, and healing all that were oppressed of the deuil, for God was with him. And we ar witnes∣ses of all things which he did in the land of the Iewes and at Ierusalem, whom they slew and hanged on tree. Him God raised vp the third day, and shewed him openly, not to al the people, but to vs witnesses (chosen before of God for the same intent) which did eate and drink with him after he arose from death. And he com∣maunded vs to preach vnto the people, and to testifye that it is hee which was ordained of God to be the iudge of the quick and the deade. To him geue all the prophetes witnes, that through hys name whosoeuer beleueth in him, shall receyue remission of syns. ¶The Gospell. Luke. xxiii. BEhold, two of the Disciples went that same day to a towne called Emaus, which was from Ierusa∣lem about .lx. furlongs, and they talked together of all the thinges that had happened. And it chaunced while they commoned together and reasoned, Iesus hymselfe drew nere & went with them. But their eyes were holden yt they should not know him. And he sayd vnto them, what maner of communications are these that ye haue one to another as ye walke, and are sad? And the one of them whose name was Cleophas aun∣swered
and sayd vnto him: art thou onely a straunger in Ierusalem, and hast not knowen the things which haue chaunced ther in these daies? He said vnto them: what thinges? And they sayd vnto hym, of Iesus of Nazareth which was a Prophet mighty in deede and word before God and all the people: and how the hie Priestes and our rulers deliuered him to be condem∣ned to death, & haue crucified him. But we trusted that it had bene he which should haue redemed Israel. And as touching all these thinges, to day is euen the third day that they were done: Yea and certaine women of our company made vs astonied which came earely vn∣to the sepulchre, & found not his body, and came, saying that they had seene a vision of angels, which said that he was aliue. And certain of them which were with vs went to the sepulchre, and found it euen so as the wo∣men had sayd, but him they saw not. And he sayd vnto them: O fooles and flow of hart to beleue all that the Prophets haue spoken, ought not Christ to haue suffe∣red these things, and to enter into his glory? And he began at Moises and all the Prophets, and interpre∣ted vnto them in all scriptures which were written of hym. And they drewe nye vnto the towne which they went vnto. And he made as though he wold haue gon further. And they constrained him saying: abide with vs, for it draweth towards night, & the day is far pas∣sed. And he went in to tary with them. And it came to passe as he sat at meat with them he tooke bread & bles∣sed it, and brake & gaue to them. And their eies were o∣pened, & they knew him, & he vanished out of their sight and they said betwene themselues: did not our harts burne within vs while he talked with vs by the way,
and opened to vs the scriptures? And they rose vp the same houre, and returned to Ierusalem, and found the eleuē gathered together, & them that were with them saying: the Lord is risen in deede & hath appeared vn∣to Simon. And they told what things were done in the way, and how they knew him in breaking of bread. ¶The Tuesday in Easter weeke. The Epistle. Actes. xiii. YE men and brethren, children of the generation of Abraham, and whosoeuer among you feareth God to you is this woord of saluation sent. For the inhabi∣ters of Ierusalem and their rulers, because they knew him not, nor yet the voices of the Prophets, which are read euery Sabboth day, they haue fulfilled them in condemning him. And whē they found no cause of death in him, yet desired they Pilate to kill him. And when they had fulfilled all that was written of hym, they tooke hym downe from the tree and put hym in a Se∣pulchre. But God raysed him agayne from death the third day, and he was sene many daies of them which went with him frō Galile to Ierusalem, which ar wit∣nesses vnto the people. And we declare vnto you how that the promis (which was made vnto ye fathers) god hath fulfilled vnto their children (euen vnto vs) in that he raised vp Iesus again. Euen as it is written in the second Psalme: thou art my sonne, this day haue I be∣gotten thee. As concerning that he raised him vp from death, now no more to returne to corruption, he sayd on this wise: The holy promises made to Dauid, wyll I geue faithfully vnto you. Wherefore he sayth also in an other place: Thou shalt not suffer thine holy one to see corruptiō. For Dauid (after that he had in his time
fulfylled the wyll of God) fell on sleepe, and was layd vnto his fathers, and saw corruption. But he whom God raised againe, saw no corruption. Be it knowen vnto you therfore (ye men and brethren) that through this man is preached vnto you forgeuenes of sinnes, & that by him all that beleue are iustified from al things, from which ye could not be iustified by the law of Moi∣ses. Beware therfore least that fall on you which is spo∣ken of in the Prophets: behold ye despisers & wonder, and perish ye, for I do a worke in your daies, which ye shal not beleue, though a man declare it vnto you. ¶The Gospell. Luke. xxiiii. IEsus stood in the middest of his Disciples, and sayd vnto thē: peace be vnto you: It is I, feare not. But they were abashed and afraide, and supposed that they had sene a spirit. And he said vnto them: why are ye troubled, and why do thoughts arise in your harts? Behold my handes and my feete, that it is euen I my selfe. Handle me and see, for a spirit hath no flesh and bones as ye see me haue. And when he had thus spokē, he shewed them his hands & his feete. And while they yet beleued not for ioy, and wondered, he sayd vnto them: Haue ye here any meate? And they offered him a peece of broyled fysh, and of a hoony combe. And he tooke it, and did eate before them. And he said vnto thē: these are the words which I spake vnto you, whyle I was yet with you. That all must needes be fulfylled which were wrytten of me in the law of Moyses, and in the Prophets, and in the Psalmes. Then opened he their wits that they might vnderstand the scriptures, & said vnto them: Thus it is wrytten, & thus it behoued Christ to suffer, and to rise againe from death the third
day, and that repentaunce & remission of syns should be preached in his name among all nacions, and must be∣gin at Ierusalem. And ye ar witnes of these things. ¶The first Sunday after Easter. The Epistle. i. Iohn. v. ALl that is born of God, ouercōmeth the world. And this is the victory that ouercōmmeth the world, euen our fayth. Who is he that ouercōmeth the world but he that beleueth yt Iesus is the son of God? This Iesus Christ is he that came by water and bloud, not by water onely, but by water and bloud. And it is the spirit that beareth witnes, because the spirit is truth. For there are three which beare record in heauen: the father, the word, and the holy Ghost, & these three are one. And ther are three which beare record in earth, the spirit, & water, and bloud: and these three are one. If we receiue the witnes of men, the witnes of God is greater. For this is the witnes of God that is greater which he testified of his sonne. He that beleueth on the sonne of God, hath the witnes in himselfe. He that be∣leueth not God, hath made him a lier, because he bele∣ueth not the record yt God gaue his sonne. And this is the record, how yt God hath geuen vnto vs eternal life, & this life is in his sonne. He that hath the sonne, hath life: and he that hath not ye sonne of God, hath not life. ¶The Gospell. Iohn. xx. THe same day at night which was the fyrst day of the Sabboths when the doers were shut (where the Disciples were assembled together for feare of the Iewes) came Iesus and stood in the middest, & sayd vnto them: Peace be vnto you. And when he had so sayd, he shewed vnto them hys hands and hys side.
Then wer the disciples glad when they saw the Lord Then said Iesus vnto them againe: Peace be vnto you As my Father sent me, euen so send I you also. And when he had sayd these wordes, he breathed on them and sayd vnto them: receiue ye the holy ghost. Whoso∣euers syns ye remit, they are remitted vnto them. And whosoeuers syns ye retaine, they are retayned. ¶The second Sunday after Easter. The Epistle. i. Peter. ii. THis is thanke worthy, if a man for conscience to∣ward God endure griefe, and suffer wrong vnde∣serued. For what praise is it, if whē ye be buffeted for your faultes, ye take it paciently? But & if when ye do well ye suffer wronge and take it paciently, then is there thanke with God. For hereunto verely were ye called. For Christ also suffered for vs, leauing vs an en∣sample that we shuld folow his steps which did no sin, neither was ther guile found in his mouth, which whē he was reuiled, reuiled not again, when he suffred, he threatned not: but committed the vengeaunce to him yt iudgeth righteously, which his own selfe bare our sins in his body on the tree, yt we being deliuered from syn, should liue vnto righteousnes. By whose strips ye were healed. For ye were as shepe going astray, but are now turned vnto the shepehard and Bishop of your soules. ¶The Gospell. Iohn. x. CHrist sayd vnto his Disciples: I am the good shephard: a good shephard geueth hys lyfe for the sheepe. An hyred seruaunt, and hee which is not the shepheard (neither the shepe are his own) seeth the Woolfe comming and leaueth the shepe and fleeth, and the Woolfe catcheth and scattereth the sheepe.
The hyred seruaunt fleeth because he is an hyred ser∣uaunt and careth not for the sheepe. I am the good shepheard, and know my sheepe, and am knowen of mine: as my father knoweth me, euen so know I also my father. And I geue my life for the sheepe, and other sheepe I haue which are not of this folde: Them also must I bring, and they shall heare my voyce, and there shall be one folde, and one shepheard. ¶The third Sunday after Easter. The Epistle .i. Peter. ii. DErely beloued, I besech you as straungers and pilgrimes, abstaine from fleshly lusts which fight against the soule: and see that ye haue honest con∣uersation among the Gentyls, that wher as they back∣bite you as euil doers, they may see your good workes and prayse God in the day of visitacion. Submit your selues therfore to euery man for the Lords sake, whe∣ther it be vnto the king as vnto the chiefe head, either vnto rulers as vnto them that are sent of him for the punishment of euyl doers, but for the laud of them that do wel: for so is the wl of God that with wel doing ye may stop the mouthes of folish & ignorant men: as free, & not as hauing the liberty for a clock of maliciousnes, but euen as the seruants of God. Honour all men, loue brotherly felowship, feare God, honour the king. ¶The Gospell. Iohn. xvi. IEsus sayd to his disciples: After a while ye shal not see me, and again after a while ye shal see me, for I go to the Father. Then said some of his disciples be∣twene themselues, what is this that he saith vnto vs: after a while ye shall not see me, & againe after a while ye shal see me, & that I go to the father. They said ther∣fore
what is this that he saith: after a wyle. We cannot tell what he saith. Iesus perceyued that they would aske him, and sayd vnto them: ye enquire of this be∣twene your selues, because I said: after a while ye shal not see me, and again after a while ye shall see me: Ve∣rely, verely I say vnto you, ye shall weepe and lament, but contrarywise the world shal reioyce. Ye shal sorow but your sorow shalbe turned into ioy. A woman when she trauaileth hath sorow, because her houre is come, but assoone as she is delyuered of the Child, shee remē∣breth no more the anguish, for ioy that a man is borne into the world. And ye now therfore haue sorow: but I will see you againe, and your hearts shal reioyce and your ioy shall no man take from you. ¶The fourth Sunday after Easter. The Epistle. Iames. i. EVery good gift, & euery perfect gift, is from aboue, and commeth down from the father of lights, with whō is no variablenes, neither shadow of chaunge. Of his own wil begat he vs with the word of truth, yt we should be the first fruites of his creatures, Wherfore (deare brethren) let euery man be swift to heare, slow to speeke, slow to wrath. For ye wrath of man worketh not that which is righteous before God. Wherfore lay apart al filthines, and superfluity of maliciousnes, and receiue with mekenes the word that is graffed in you, which is able to saue your soules. ¶The Gospell. Iohn. xvi. IEsus said vnto his disciples: now I go my way to him that sent me, & none of you asketh me whether I go. But because I haue said such things vnto you your harts are ful of sorow. Neuertheles I tel you the
truth, it is expedient for you that I go away. For if I go not away, the cōforter will not come vnto you. But if I depart, I wil send him vnto you. And when he is come he will rebuke the world of synne, and of righte∣ousnes, and of iudgement. Of syn because they beleue not on me. Of righteousnes, because I go to my father, and ye shal see me no more. Of iudgement, because the prince of this world is iudged already. I haue yet many things to say vnto you, but ye cannot beare them away now: how be it when he is come (which is the spirit of truth) he wyll leade you into all truth. He shall not speake of him selfe, but whatsoeuer he shall heare, that shall he speake: and he wyll shew you things to come. He shal glorify me, for he shal receyue of mine, and shal shew vnto you. Althinges that the Father hath, are mine: therefore sayd I vnto you, that he shall take of mine, and shew vnto you. ¶The fyft Sunday after Easter. The Epistle. Iames. i. SEe that ye be doers of the worde, and not hearers onely, deceiuing your own selues, For if any man heare the word, and declareth not the same by hys workes, he is like vnto a man beholding his bodely face in a glas: For assoone as he hath looked on him∣self, he goeth his way and forgetteth immediatly what his fashion was. But whoso looketh in the perfect law of liberty and continueth therein (if he be not a forget∣full hearer, but a doer of the worke) the same shalbe hap¦py in his deede. If any man among you seeme to be de∣uout, and refrayneth not his tounge, but deceyueth his owne hart, this mans deuotion is in vayne. Pure de∣uotion and vndefyled before God the father is this: to
visyt the fatherles & widdowes in their aduersity, and to keepe him selfe vnspotted of the world. ¶The Gospell. Iohn. xvi. VErely, verely I say vnto you, whatsoeuer ye aske the father in my name, he wil geue it you. Hitherto haue ye asked nothing in my name. Aske and ye shall receiue yt your ioy may be ful. These things haue I spokē vnto you by prouerbes. The time wil come when I shall no more speake vnto you by prouerbes: but I shall shew you plainly frō my father. At that day shal ye aske in my name: And I say vnto you that I will speake vnto my father for you. For ye father himselfe loueth you, because ye haue loued me, & haue beleued yt I cam out frō God. I went out frō the father, & cam into the world. Again I leaue the world & go to the father. His Disciples said vnto him: Lo, now thou talkest plainly, and speakest no prouerbe. Now are we sure that thou knowest althings and nedest not that any man should aske thee any que∣stion, therfore beleue we that thou cammest from God. Iesus answered thē: now ye do beleue. Behold ye houre draweth nie, and is already come, that ye shal be scatte∣red euery man to his owne, and shall leaue me alone. And yet I am not alone, for the Father is with me. These wordes haue I spoken vnto you, that in me ye might haue peace, for in the world shal ye haue tribula∣cion: but be of good chere I haue ouercome the world. ¶Ascention day. The Epistle. Actes. i. IN the former treatise (deare Theophilus) we haue spoken of al yt Iesus began to do & teach, vntil ye day in which he was takē vp, after yt he through the holy
ghost had geuen commaundements vnto the Apostles whom he had chosen, to whom also he shewed himselfe aliue after his passion, and that by many tokens appea∣ring vnto them forty daies, & speaking of the kingdom of God, and gathered them together and commaunded them that they should not depart from Ierusalem, but to waite for the promise of the father, wherof (saith he) ye haue heard of me. For Iohn truly baptised with wa∣ter, but ye shal be baptised with ye holy ghost, after these few daies. When they therfore wer come together they asked of him saying: Lord, wilt yu at this time restore a∣gaine the kingdome of Israel? And he said vnto them: it is not for you to know ye times or the seasons which the Father hath put in his own power. But ye shall re∣ceaue power after the holy ghost is come vpō you. And ye shall be witnes vnto me, not onely in Ierusalem, but also in all Iewry, & in all Samaria, and euen vnto the worlds end. And when he had spoken these thinges, while they beheld, he was taken vp on hye, and a cloud receiued him vp out of theyr sighte. And while they looked stedfastly vp toward heauen as he went, behold two men stood by thē in white aparel, which also said: ye men of Galile, why stand ye gasing vp into heauen? This same Iesus which is takē vp from you into hea∣uen, shal come, euē as ye haue sene him go into heauen. ¶The Gospell. Mark. xv. IEsus appeared vnto the eleuen, as they sat at meate: and cast in their teeth their vnbeliefe and hardnes of hart, because they beleued not them which had seene that he was risen again from the dead: and he said vn∣to them: Go ye into al the world, & preach the Gospel to all creatures, he yt beleueth & is baptised, shalbe saued,
but he yt beleueth not, shalbe damned. And these tokens shal folow them that beleue. In my name they shal cast out deuils, they shal speake with new tonges, they shal driue away serpents, & if they drink any deadly thing it shall not hurt thē. They shal lay theyr hand of the sick & they shal recouer. So then when the Lord had spoken vnto them, he was receiued into heauen, and is on the right hand of God. And they went forth and preached euery where, the Lord working with them and confir∣ming the woord with miracles folowing. ¶The Sunday after the Ascencion day. The Epistle. i. Peter. iiii. THe end of all things is at hand: be ye therfore sober and watch vnto praier. But aboue all things haue feruent loue among your selues, for loue shal couer the multitude of synnes. Be ye herberous one to another without grudging. As euery mā hath receued the gift, euen so minister ye same one to another, as good mini∣sters of ye manifold graces of God. If any man speake, let him talke as the words of God. If any mā minister, let him do it as of the hability which god ministreth to him, yt God in al things may be glorified through Iesu Christ, to whom be praise & dominion for euer & euer. ¶The Gospell. Iohn. xv. WHen the Comforter is come whom I wil send vnto you from the father (euen the spirit of truth, which procedeth of the father) he shal testify of me. And ye shal beare witnes also because ye haue bene with me from the beginning. These things haue I said vnto you, be∣cause ye should not be offended. They shal excommuni∣cate you: Yea, the time shal come, that whosoeuer killeth you, wil thinke yt he doth God seruice. And such things
wyl they do vnto you, because they haue not knowen ye father, neither yet me. But these thinges I haue told you, yt when the time is come, ye may remember then that I told you. ¶VVhitsonday. The Epistle. Actes. ii. WHen the fifty dayes were at an ende, they were all with one accord together in one place, & sodaynly ther came a sound frō heauen, as it had bene the com∣ming of a mighty winde, & it filled all the house where they sat. And there appeared vnto them clouen toūgs, like as they had bene of fire, and it sat vpon ech one of them, & they were all filled with the holy Ghost, & be∣gan to speake with other tounges: euen as the same spirit gaue them vtteraunce. Then were dwelling at Ierusalem Iewes, deuout men, out of euery nation of them that are vnder heauen. When this was noysed about, the multitude came together, & were astonyed, because that euery man heard them speake wyth hys own language. They wondred all & marueled, saying among thēselues: behold, are not al these which speake of Galile? And how heare we euery man his own toūg wherin we wer born? Parthians & Medes, and Ela∣mites, and the inhahiters of Mesopotamia, & of Iew∣ry, and of Capadocia, of Pontus & Asia, Phrigia and Pamphilia, of Egipt, & of the parties of Libia, which is beside Siren, & straungers of Rome, Iewes & Pro¦selites, Greekes and Arabians, we haue heard them speake in our own toungs the great workes of God. ¶The Gospell. Iohn. xiiii. IEsus said vnto his disciples: If ye loue me, kepe my cōmaundements, & I wil pray the father, & he shall geue you another comforter, that he may abide with
you for euer: euen ye spirit of truth, whō the world can∣not receiue, because the world seeth him not, neither knoweth him. But ye know him, for he dwelleth with you, and shalbe in you. I will not leaue you comfortles, but wil come to you. Yet a litle while, and the worlde seeth me no more: but ye see me. For I liue, and ye shall lyue. At that day shall ye know that I am in my father, and you in me, & I in you. He that hath my commaun∣dements and keepeth them, the same is he that loueth me. And he that loueth me, shalbe beloued of my father, and I wil loue him, and wil shew mine own selfe vnto him. Iudas saith vnto him (not Iudas Iscarioth:) Lord what is done that thou wilt shew thy selfe vnto vs, and not vnto the world? Iesus answered and said vnto them: if a man loue me, he will keepe my sayings, and my Father wyll loue him, and we wyll come vnto him, and dwell with him. He that loueth me not, kee∣peth not my sayinges. And the word which ye heare is not mine, but the fathers which sent me. These things haue I spoken vnto you, being yet present with you. But the comforter which is the holy ghost whom my Father wyll sende in my name, he shall teach you al∣thinges, and bring althinges to your rememberaunce whatsoeuer I haue said vnto you. Peace I leaue with you, my peace I geue vnto you. Not as the world ge∣ueth, geue I vnto you. Let not your harts be greued, neither feare. Ye haue heard how I said vnto you I go and come againe vnto you. Yf ye loued me, yee would verely reioyce, because I sayd, I go vnto the Fa∣ther. For the Father is greater then I. And now I haue shewed you before it came, that when it is come to passe, ye might beleue. Hereafter wyll I not talke
many wordes vnto you. For the Prince of this world commeth, and hath nought in me. But that the world may know that I loue the Father. And as the Father gaue me commaundement, euen so do I. ¶The Monday in whitson weeke. The Epistle. Actes. x. THen Peter opened his mouth & said: of a truth I perceiue that there is no respect of persons wyth God, but in all people he that feareth him & wor∣keth righteousnes, is accepted with him. Ye know the preaching that God sent vnto the chyldren of Israel, preaching peace by Iesus Christ, which is Lord ouer althinges: which preaching was published through∣out all Iewry (and began in Galile, after the baptisme which Iohn preached) how God annointed Iesus of Nazareth with the holy Ghost & with power. Which Iesus went about doyng good, and healyng all that were oppressed of the deuyll. For God was with him. And we are witnesses of althings which he did in the land of the Iewes, and at Ierusalem, whom they slew and hanged on a tree. Hym God raysed vp the third day, and shewed him openly, not to all the people, but vnto vs witnesses (chosen before of God for the same entent) which dyd eate and drinke with him after hee rose from death. And he commaunded vs to preache vnto the people, and to testify that it is he which was ordayned of God to be the Iudge of the quick and the dead. To hym geue all the Prophetes wytnes, that through his name whosoeuer beleueth in hym, shall receiue remission of syns. While Peter yet spake these wordes, the holy Ghost fell on all them which heard the preaching. And they of the circumcision which be∣leued,
were astonied, as many as came with Peter: be∣cause that on the Gentiles also was shed out the gift of the holy ghost. For they heard them speake with toūgs and magnify God. Then answered Peter: can any man forbid water that these should be baptised which haue receiued the holy Ghost as well as we? And he com∣maunded them to be baptised in the name of the Lord. Then prayed they him to tary a few dayes. ¶The Gospell. Iohn. iii. SO God loued the world, that he gaue hys onely be¦gotten sonne, that whosoeuer beleueth in him shuld not perish, but haue euerlasting life. For God sent not his sonne into the world to condemne the world, but that the world through him might be saued. But he that beleueth on him, is not condemned. But he that beleueth not, is condempned all redy, because he hath not beleued in the name of the onely begotten sonne of God. And this is the condempnacion: that light is come into the world, and men loued darknes more thē light, because their dedes were euil. For euery one that doth euil, hateth the light, neither cōmeth to the light, least his deedes should be reproued. But he that doth the truth, commeth to the lyght, that his deedes may be knowen, how that they are wrought in God. ¶The Tuesday sn whitsun weeke. The Epistle. Actes. viii. WHen the Apostles which were at Ierusalem heard say that Samaria had receiued the woord of God, they sent vnto them Peter and Iohn. Which whē they were come down, praied for them that they might re∣ceiue the holy Ghost. For as yet he was come on none of them, but they were baptised onely in the name of
Christ Iesus. Then they layd their handes on them, and they receiued the holy Ghost. ¶The Gospell. Iohn. x. VErely, verely I say vnto you: he that entreth not in by the doore into the shepefold, but climeth vp some other way, the same is a theefe & a murtherer. But he that entreth in by the doore, is the Shepheard of the sheepe: To him the porter openeth, & the sheepe heare his voice, & he calleth his own shepe by name, and lea∣deth them out. And when he hath sent forth his owne shepe, he goeth before them, & the shepe folow him: for they know his voice. A straunger wyl they not folow, but wyll flee from hym, for they know not the voyce of straungers. This prouerbe spake Iesus vnto thē, but they vnderstood not what things they were which he spake vnto them. Then sayd Iesus vnto them againe: Verely, verely I say vnto you, I am the doore of the shepe. Al (euen as many as came before me) ar theues & murtherers, but the shepe did not heare them. I am the doore, by me if any enter in, he shal be safe, & shal go in & out, and finde pasture. A theefe cōmeth not but for to steale, kyll, and destroy, I am come that they might haue life, & that they might haue it more aboūdantly. ¶Trinitie Sunday. The Epistle. Apoca. iiii. AFter this I looked, & behold a doore was open in heauen, and the first voyce which I heard, was as it were of a trumpet talkyng wyth me, which sayde: Come vp hither, & I wil shew thee things which must be fulfilled hereafter. And immediately I was in the spirit: And behold a seat was set in heauen, & one sat on ye seat. And he that sat was to looke vpon like vnto
a Iaspar stone, and a Sardine stone. And there was a raine bow about the seat, in sight lyke vnto an Eme∣rauld. And about the seate were .xxiiii. seates. And vp∣on the seates .xiiij. elders sitting, clothed in whyte ray∣ment, and had on their heades crownes of gold. And out of the seate proceeded lightnings, and thundrings and voyces, and there were seuen lampes of fyre bur∣ning before the seate, which are the seuen spirites of God. And before the seate there was a sea of glas lyke vnto Christal, and in the middest of the seate and round about the seate were foure beastes full of eyes before and behinde. And the fyrst beast was lyke a Lion: and the second beast was lyke a Calfe: and the third beast had a face as a man: and the fourth Beast was like a slying Eagle. And the foure beastes had ech of thē sixe winges about him, and they were ful of eyes with in. And they did not rest day nor night, saying: Holy, holy, holy, Lord god almighty, which was, and is, & is to come. And when those beastes gaue glory & honour and thankes to him that sat on the seate (which liueth for euer & euer) the .xxiiij. Elders fel down before him that sat on the throne & worshipped him that liueth for euer, and cast their crownes before the throne, saying: thou art worthy, O Lord (our God) to receiue glory, and honour, and power: for thou hast created althings and for thy wyls sake they are and were created. ¶The Gospell. Iohn. iii. THere was a man of the Phariseis named Nicode∣mus a Ruler of the Iewes, ye same came to Iesus by night and said vnto him: Rabbi, we know that thou art a Teacher come from God: for no man could do such myracles as thou doest, except God were wyth
hym. Iesus aunswered and sayd vnto hym: Verely, verely I say vnto thee, except a man be borne from a∣boue, he cannot see the kingdome of God. Nicodemus sayd vnto him: how can a man be borne when hee is olde? Can hee enter into hys mothers wombe and be born again? Iesus answered: verely, verely I say vnto thee, except a man be borne of water and the spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdome of God. That which is borne of the flesh, is flesh: and that which is borne of the spirit, is spirit. Maruaile not thou that I sayd to thee, ye must be borne from aboue. The wynde blo∣weth where it lusteth, and thou hearest the sound ther∣of, but thou canst not tell whence it commeth, or whe∣ther it goeth: So is euerye one that is borne of the spirit. Nicodemus answered and sayd vnto him: how can these things be? Iesus answered and sayd vnto him: Art thou a Maister in Israel, and knowest not these thinges? Verelye, verelye I say vnto thee: we speake that we know, and testifye that we haue seene, and ye receiue not our wytnes. If I haue tolde you earthly thinges, and ye beleue not: how shal ye beleue if I tell you of heauenly thinges? And no man ascen∣deth vp to heauen, but he that came downe from hea∣uen, euen the sonne of man which is in heauen. And as Moises lyft vp the Serpent in the wildernes: euen so must the sonne of man be lift vp, that whosoeuer bele∣ueth on him, perish not, but haue euerlasting lyfe. ¶The first Sunday after Trinity Sunday. The Epistle. i. Iohn. iiii. DEarly beloued, let vs loue one another, for loue cō∣meth of God. And euery one that loueth, is borne of God, and knoweth God. He that loueth not, know∣eth
not God, for God is loue. In this appeareth the the loue of God to vs warde, because that God sent his onely begotten son into the world, that we might liue through him. Herein is loue, not that we loued God, but that he loued vs, and sent his sonne to be the agre∣ment for our syns. Dearly beloued if God so loued vs, we ought also one to loue another. No man hath seene God at any time. If we loue one another, god dwelleth in vs, & his loue is perfect in vs. Hereby know we that we dwell in him, and he in vs, because he hath geuen vs of his Spirit. And we haue seene and do testyfy that the father sent the son to be ye sauior of the world. Whosoeuer confesseth that Iesus is the sonne of God, in him dwelleth God, & he in god. And we haue knowē and beleued the loue that God hath to vs. God is loue & he that dwelleth in loue, dwelleth in god, and God in him. Herein is the loue perfect in vs, that we should trust in ye day of iudgemēt. For as he is, euen so are we in this world. There is no feare in loue, but perfect loue casteth out feare: for feare hath painfulnes. He that feareth, is not perfect in loue. We loue him, for he loued vs fyrst. If a man say: I loue god and yet hate his bro∣ther, he is a lyer, for how can hee that loueth not his brother whom he hath seene, loue God whom he hath not sene? And this cōmaūdement haue we of him that he which loueth God, should loue his brother also. ¶The Gospell. Luke. xvi. THere was a certain ritch man, which was clothed in purple and fyne white, and fared deliciously e∣uery day: And ther was a certaine begger named Lazarus, which lay at his gate full of sores, desyring to be refreshed wyth the crummes which fell from the
ritch mans boord, & no man gaue vnto him. The dogs came also and lyked his sores. And it fortuned that the begger dyed, & was caryed by the aungels into Abra∣hams bosome. The ritch man also died & was buried, and being in hell in tormentes, he lyft vp his eyes and saw Abraham a farre of and Lazarus in his bosome, and he cryed and sayd, father Abraham haue mercy on me, and send Lazarus that he may dip the typ of his finger in water, and coole my toung, for I am tormen∣ted in this flame. But Abraham said: Sonne remem∣ber that thou in thy life time receiuedst thy pleasure, & contrary wise Lazarus receued paine. But now he is comforted, and thou art punished. Beyonde all this be∣twene vs and you there is a great space set, so that they which would go from hence to you cannot, neither may come from thence to vs. Then he said: I pray thee therefore father, send him to my Fathers house (for I haue fiue brethren) for to warne them, least they come also into this place of torment. Abraham said vnto him: they haue Moises and the Prophets, let them heare them. And he said: nay father Abraham, but if one come vnto them from the dead, they wyll repent. He sayd vn∣to him, if they heare not Moyses & the Prophets, nei∣ther wil they beleue though one rose frō death againe. ¶The second sunday after Trinitie Sunday. The Epistle. i. Iohn. iii. MEruaile not my brethren, though the world hate you. We know yt we are translated frō death vnto life, because we loue the brethren. He yt loueth not his brother, abideth in death. Whosoeuer hateth hys brother, is a manslear. And ye know that no manslear hath eternall lyfe abiding in him. Hereby perceiue we
loue, because he gaue his lyfe for vs, and we ought to geue our liues for the brethren. But who so hath this worldes good, and seeth his brother haue neede, and shutteth vp hys compassion from him, how dwelleth the loue of God in him? My babes, let vs not loue in worde, neyther in toung, but in deede and verity. Here∣by we know that we are of the verity, and can quiet our harts before him. For if our hart condempne vs, God is greater then our hart, and knoweth althings. Dear∣ly beloued, if our hart condempne vs not, then haue we trust to God ward, and whatsoeuer we aske we re∣ceiue of him, because we keepe his commaundements, and do those things which are pleasaunt in his sight. And this is his commaundement, that we beleue on the name of his Sonne Iesus Christ, and loue one an∣other, as he gaue commaundemēt. And he that kepeth hys commaundementes, dwelleth in hym, and he in him: and hereby we know that he abideth in vs euen by the spirit which he hath geuen vs. ¶The Gospel. Luke. xiiii. A Certayne man ordeined a great supper, and bad many, & sent his seruaunt at supper time to say to them that were bidden: come, for althings are now redy. And they all at once began to make excuse. The fyrst sayd vnto him: I haue bought a farme, & I must needes go and see it. I pray thee haue me excused And another said: I haue bought fyne yoke of Oxen, and I go to proue them. I pray thee haue mee excu∣sed. And an other sayd: I haue maryed a wyfe, and therefore I cannot come. And the Seruaunt retur∣ned and brought his Maister woorde agayne therof. Then was the good man of the house displeased, and
said vnto his seruant: go out quickly into the streetes and quarters of the city, & bring in hither the poore and feble, & the halt & blind. And the seruant said: Lord, it is done as thou hast cōmaunded, & yet there is roume. And the Lord sayd vnto the seruant: go out into ye hye waies and hedges, & compell them to come in, that my house may be fylled. For I say vnto you, that none of these men which were bidden, shall taste of my supper. ¶The third Sunday after Trinity sunday. The Epistle. i. Peter. v. SVbmit your selues euery man one to another, knyt your selues together in lowlines of minde. For God resisteth the proude, and geueth grace to the humble. Submit your selues therfore vnder the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you when the tyme is come. Cast all your care vpon hym, for he careth for you. Be sober & watch, for your aduersary ye deuil, as a roaring Lion, walketh about, seeking whom he may deuour, whom resist stedfast in the faith: knowing that ye same afflictions are appoynted vnto your brethren that are in the world. But the God of all grace which hath cal∣led vs vnto his eternal glory by Christ Iesu, shall hys own selfe (after that ye haue suffered a little affliction) make you perfect, settle, strength, and stablish you. To him be glory and dominion for euer and euer. Amen. ¶The Gospell. Luke. xv. THen resorted vnto him al the Publicans and syn∣ners for to heare hym. And the Phariseys and Scribes murmured saying: He receiueth sinners and eateth with them. But he put foorth this parable vnto thē saying: What man among you hauing an hū∣dred sheepe (if he lose one of thē) doth not leaue ninety
and nine in the wildernes & goeth after that which is lost, vntill he finde it? And when he hath founde it, he layeth it on his shoulders with ioy. And assoone as he commeth home, he calleth together his louers and neighbours saying vnto them: Reioyce with me, for I haue found my shepe which was lost. I say vnto you, that likewise ioy shalbe in heauen ouer one synner that repenteth, more then ouer ninety and nine iust persons which nede no repentaunce. Either what woman ha∣uing ten groates (if she loose one) doth not light a can∣dle & swepe the house, & seke dilygently til she finde it: and when she hath found it she calleth her louers and her neighbours together, saying: Reioyce with me, for I haue found the groat which I lost. Lykewise. I say vnto you, shall there be ioy in the presence of the Aun∣gels of God ouer one synner that repenteth. ¶The fourth sunday after Trinity sunday. The Epistle. Roma. viii. I Suppose that the afflictions of this life are not wor∣thy of the glory which shalbe shewed vpon vs. For the feruent desyre of the creature abydeth looking when the sonnes of God shall appeare, because the creature is subdued to vanity against the wyll therof. but for his wyll which hath subdued the same in hope. For the same creature shall be deliuered from the bon∣dage of corruption, into the gloryous liberty of the sonnes of God. For we know that euery creature gro∣neth with vs also, and trauaileth in payne, euen vnto this tyme, not onely it, but we also which haue the fyrst fruites of the spirit, mourne in our selues also and wayte for the adopcion (of the children of God) euen the deliueraunce of our bodies.
¶The Gospell. Luke. vi. BE ye mercyfull, as your Father also is mercyfull. Iudge not, & ye shal not be iudged: condemn not, and ye shal not be condemned. Forgeue, & ye shal be forgeuen. Geue, and it shalbe geuen vnto you, good measure, and pressed downe, and shaken together, and running ouer shall men geue into your bosomes. For with the same measure that ye mete withal, shal other men mete to you againe. And he put forth a similitude vnto them: Can the blind leade the blind? do they not both fal into the ditche? The disciple is not aboue hys maister. Euery man shalbe perfect euen as his maister is. Why seest thou a mote in thy brothers eye, but con∣siderest not the beame that is in thine own eye? Either how canst thou say to thy brother: Brother, let me pul out the mote that is in thine eye, when thou seest not the beame yt is in thine own eye? First, thou hipocrite, cast out the beame out of thine own eye, thē shalt thou see perfectly to put out ye mote yt is in thy brothers eye. ¶The .v. Sunday after Trinity sunday. The Epistle. i. Peter. iii. BE ye all of one mynde, & of one hart. Loue as bre∣thren. Be pityful, be curteous, meeke, not rendryng euil for euil, rebuke for rebuke: but cōtrariwise blesse, knowing that ye are therunto called, euen yt ye should be heires of the blessing. For he yt doth long after lyfe, & loueth to see good daies, let him refrain his toung frō euyl, and his lyps that they speake no guile. Let hym eschew euil, & do good, let him seeke peace and ensue it. For the eyes of the Lord are ouer the righteous, & hys eares are open vnto their praiers. Againe, the face of the Lord is ouer them that do euil. Moreouer, who is
he that wyl harme you, if ye folow that which is good? Yea, happy are ye if any trouble happen vnto you for righteousnes sake. Be not ye afrayd for any terrour of them, neyther be ye troubled, but sanctifie the Lorde God in your hartes. ¶The Gospel. Luke. v. IT came to passe that (when the people preased vpon him to heare the woord of God) he stood by the lake of Genazareth, & saw two shyps stand by the lakes side, but the fisher men were gone out of them, & were washing their nets. And he entred into one of ye ships (which pertained to Simon) and prayed him that he would thrust out a litle frō the land. And he sat down and taught the people out of the shyp. When he had left speaking, he sayd vnto Simō: Launch out into the deepe, and let slyp your nets to make a draught. And Simon aunswered and sayd vnto him: Mayster, we haue laboured all night, and haue taken nothing. Ne∣uertheles at thy commaundement I wyll loose foorth the net. And when they had so done, they inclosed a great multitude of fyshes: But their net brake, and they beckened to their felowes (which wer in the other ship) that they should come and helpe them. And they came and fylled both the shyppes that they soonke a∣gayne. When Simon Peter saw this, he fel downe at Iesus knees, saying: Lord, go from me, for I am a synfull man. For he was astonyed, and all that were with hym, at the draught of Fishes which they had taken, and so was also Iames and Iohn the sonnes of Zebede, which were partners with Simon. And Iesus sayd vnto Simon: feare not, from hence forth yu shalt catch men. And they brought the ships to land,
and forsooke all, and followed hym. ¶The sixt Sunday after Trinity sunday. The Epistle. Roma. vi. KNow ye not that al we which are baptised in Ie∣sus Christ, are baptised to die with him? We are buried thē with him by baptisme for to dye. That likewise as Christ was raysed from death by the glory of the Father, euen so we also should walke in a newe life. For if we be graft in death lyke vnto him, euen so shall we be partakers of the holy resurrection. Know∣ing this, that your old man is crucified wyth him also, that the body of synne might vtterly be destroyed, that henceforth we should not be seruaunts vnto synne. For he that is dead, is iustified from syn. Wherefore if we be dead with Christ, we beleue that we shall also lyue with him: knowing that Christ being raised frō death, dieth no more. Death hath no more power ouer hym. For as touching that he dyed, he dyed concerning syn once, & as touching that he liueth, he liueth vnto God. Likewise cōsider ye also, yt ye ar dead as touching syn, but are aliue vnto God, thorow Iesus Christ our lord. ¶The Gospell. Math. v. IEsus said vnto his disciples: except your righteous∣nes excede the righteousnes of the Scribes & Pha∣riseis, ye cannot enter into the kingdome of heauen. Ye haue heard that it was said vnto them of old tyme. Thou shalt not kill, whosoeuer killeth shalbe in daun∣ger of iudgement. But I say vnto you: that whosoeuer is angry with his brother (vnaduisedly) shalbe in daun∣ger of iudgement. And whosoeuer sayth vnto his bro∣ther, Racha: shal be in daunger of a counsell. But who∣soeuer saith thou foole, shall be in daunger of Hell fyre.
Therfore if thou offerest thy gift at the altar, and there remembrest that thy brother hath ought against thee, leaue there thine offering before the altar, and go thy way first, & be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift. Agree with thine aduersary quickely, whiles thou art in the way with him, least at any time the aduersary deliuer thee to the iudge, and the iudge deliuer thee to the minister, and then thou be cast into prison. Verely I say vnto thee, thou shalt not come out thence, tyl thou haue payed the vttermost farthing. ¶The .vii. Sunday after Trinity Sunday. The Epistle. Roma. vi. I Speake grosly, because of the infirmity of your flesh. As ye haue geuen your members seruaunts to vnclennes and to iniquity (from one iniquity to another) euen so now geue ouer your members ser∣uaunts vnto righteousnes, that ye may be sanctified, For when ye were seruaunts of syn, ye were voide of righteousnes. What frut had you then in those things wherof ye ar now ashamed? for the end of those things are death. But now are ye deliuered from syn, and made the seruants of God, and haue your fruite to be sancti∣fied, and the end euerlasting life. For the reward of syn is death, but eternall lyfe is the gyft of God, through Iesus Christ our Lord. ¶The Gospell. Mark. viii. IN those daies when ther was a very great company and had nothing to eate: Iesus called his disciples vnto him, and said vnto them: I haue compassion on the people, because they haue bene now with me three daies, and haue nothing to eate, and if I send them a∣way fasting to theyr owne houses, they shall faynt by
the way: for diuers of them came from far. And his dis∣ciples answered him: where should a man haue bread here in ye wildernes, to satisfy these? And he asked thē: how many loues haue ye? They said seuen. And he com¦maunded the people to syt down on the ground. And he tooke the seuen loaues, and whē he had geuen thanks, he brake, and gaue to his disciples to set before them. And they did set them before the people. And they had a few smal fishes. And when he had blessed, he cōmaun¦ded them also to be set before them. And they did eate, and were suffised. And they tooke vp of the brokē meate that was left seuen baskets full. And they yt dyd eate, were about foure thousand. And he sent them away. ¶The .viii. Sunday after Trinity Sunday. The Epistle. Roma. viii. BRethren, we are debters not to the flesh to liue af∣ter the flesh. For if ye liue after the flesh ye shal die, but if ye through the spirit do mortify the deedes of the body, ye shall liue. For as many as are led by the spirit of God, they are the sons of God. For ye haue not receiued the spirit of bondage to feare any more, but ye haue receiued the spirit of adoption, wherby ye cry Ab∣ba father. The same spirit certifieth our spirit, that we are the sonnes of God. If we be sonnes, then are we heires: ye heires I meane of God, and heires annexed with Christ, if so be that we suffer with him, that we may be glorified together with him. ¶The Gospell. Math. vii. BEware of false Prophetes, which come to you in shepes clothing, but inwardly they are rauening wolues: Ye shall know them by theyr fruites. Do men gather grapes of thornes, or figs of thistles? euen
so euery good tree bringeth forth good fruites, but a corrupt tree bringeth foorth euil fruits. A good tree can not bring forth bad fruits, neither can a bad tree bring forth good fruites. Euery tree that bringeth not forth good fruit, is hewen down, and cast into the fire. Wher¦fore by their fruites ye shall know thē. Not euery one yt saith vnto me, Lord, Lord, shal enter into the kingdom of heauen. but he that doth the will of my father which is in heauen, he shal enter into the kingdom of heauen. ¶The .ix. sunday after Trinity sunday. The Epistle. i. Cor. x. BRethren, I would not that ye should be ignoraunt, how that our fathers were all vnder the cloude, and all passed through the sea, and were all baptised vnder Moyses in the cloud, and in the sea, and did all eate of one spirituall meate, and did all drinke of one spiritual drinke. And they dranke all of one spiritual Rocke that folowed them, which Rocke was Christ. But in many of them had God no delight. For they wer ouerthrowē in the wildernes. These are ensamples to vs, that we should not lust after euyll thinges, as they lusted. And that ye should not be worshippers of images, as were some of them according as it is written. The people satte downe to eate and drinke, and rose vp to playe. Neyther let vs be defiled wyth fornication, as some of them were defiled with fornication, and fell in one day three and twenty thousande. Neyther let vs tempt Christ as some of them tempted, and were destroyed of serpentes. Neyther murmur yee, as some of them murmured, and were destroyed of the Destroyer. All these thinges happened vnto them for ensaum∣ples: But are wrytten to put vs in remembraunce, whom the endes ot the worlde are come vpon.
Wherfore, let him that thinketh he standeth take heede least he fall. There hath none other temptacion taken you, but such as folowed the nature of man. But God is faithfull, which shall not suffer you to be tempted aboue your strength: but shall in the middest of temptacion make away that you may be able to beare it. ¶The Gospell. Luke. xvi. IEsus said to his disciples: There was a certain rich man, which had a steward, and the same was accu∣sed vnto him, that he had wasted his goodes. And he called him, and said vnto him: how is it that I heare this of thee? Geue accoumpts of thy Stewardship, for thou mayest be no longer Steward. The Steward sayd within thy selfe: what shall I do? for my maister taketh away from me the stewardshyp. I cannot dyg, & to beg I am ashamed. I wote what to do, that when I am put out of the stewardship, they may receaue me into theyr houses. So when he had called all his mai∣sters detters together, he sayd vnto the fyrst: how much owest thou vnto my master? And he said: an hun∣dred tunnes of oyle. And he sayd vnto him take thy byl and sit downe quickly, and write fifty. Then sayd he to another: how much owest thou? and he said an hundred quarters of wheate. He sayd vnto him: take thy byl and write foure score. And the Lord commended the vniust steward, because he had done wysely. For the children of this world are in their nation wiser then the childrē of light. And I say vnto you: Make you friends of the vnrighteous Mammon, that when ye shall haue nede, they may receiue you into euerlasting habitacions. ¶The .x. Sunday after Trinity sunday.
The Epistle. i. Cor. xii. COncerning spirituall things brethren, I would not haue you ignoraunt. Ye know that ye were Gentils, and went your way vnto dum Images euen as ye were lead. Wherefore I declare vnto you, that no man speaking by the spirit of God, defieth Ie∣sus. Also no man can say that Iesus is the Lord, but by the holy Ghost. Ther are diuersities of giftes, yet but one spirit. And ther are differences of administra∣tions, and yet but one Lord. And there are diuers ma∣ners of operations, & yet one God, which worketh al in all. The gift of the spirit is geuen to euery man to ede∣fy withal. For to one is geuen through the spirite, the vtterance of wysdome: To another is geuen the vtte∣rance of knowledge by the same spirit. To another is geuen fayth by the same spirit. To another the gift of healyng by the same spirit. To another power to doo miracles. To another prophecy. To another iudge∣ment to discerne spirites. To another diuers toungs. To another the interpretacion of tounges, by these all worketh the selfe same spirite, deuidyng to euerye man a seuerall gyft, euen as he wyll. ¶The Gospell. Luke. xix. ANd when he was come neare to Ierusalem, he be∣held the city; & wept on it saying: If thou haddest knowen those thynges which belong vnto thy peace, euē in this thy day, thou wouldest take hede. But now are they hid from thine eyes. For the daies shall come vnto thee, yt thy enemies shal cast a banke about thee, and compasse thee round, & keepe thee in on euery side and make thee euen with the ground, and thy children which are in thee. And they shall not leaue in thee one stone vpon another, because thou knowest not ye tyme
of thy visitation. And he went into the temple and be∣gan to cast out them that solde therein, and them that bought saying vnto them: It is written, my house is the house of prayer, but ye haue made it a denne of theeues. And he taught dayly in the temple. ¶The .xi. sunday after Trinity sunday. The Epistle. i. Cor. i. BRethren, as pertayning to the Gospell, which I preached vnto you, which ye haue accepted, & in the which ye continue, by the which ye are also saued: I do you to weete after what maner I preached vnto you, if ye keepe it, except ye haue beleued in vaine. For first of al, I deliuered vnto you that which I receiued, how that Christ died for our syns agreing to the scrip∣tures: And yt he was buried, & that he rose againe the third day according to the scriptures: And that he was sene of Cephas, then of the twelue. After that he was seene of mo thē fiue hundred brethren at once, of which many remayne vnto this day, and many are fallen a sleepe. After that appeared he to Iames, then to all the Apostels. And last of all he was seene of me, as of one that was borne out of due time. For I am the least of ye Apostles, which am not worthy to be called an apostle, because I haue persecuted the congregation of God. But by the grace of God, I am yt I am. And his grace which is in me, was not in vayne. But I laboured more aboūdantly then they al, yet not I but the grace of God which is with me. Therfore, whether it were I or they, so we preached, and so ye haue beleued. ¶The Gospell. Luke. xviii. CHrist told this parable vnto certayne which tru∣sted in thē selues that they wer perfect, & despised
other. Two men went vp into the temple to pray, the one a Phacisey, & the other a Publican. The Pharisey stood & praied thus with him selfe: God I thank thee that I am not as other men are, extorcioners, vniust, adulterers, or as this Publican. I fast twise in ye weke, I geue tithe of al yt I possesse. And the Publican stan∣ding a far of, would not lift vp his eyes to heauen, but smot his brest saying: God be merciful to me a synner. I tel you this mā departed home to his house iustified more then ye other. For euery man yt exalteth himself, shalbe brought low, & he ye humbleth himself shalbe ex∣alted. ¶The .xii. sunday after Trinity. The Epistle. ii. Corin. iii. SVch trust haue we through Christ to God ward, not that we are sufficient of our selues to thynke anye thing of our selues, but if we be able vnto any thyng, the same cōmeth of God, which hath made vs able to minister the new testament, not of the letter, but of the spirit. For the letter killeth, but the spirite geueth lyfe. If the ministration of death through the letters figu∣red in stones was glorious, so yt the children of Israel could not behold the face of Moses, for the glory of his countenance (which glory is done away:) why shal not the ministration of the spirit be much more gloryous? For if ye ministracion of condēnation be glorious, much more doth the ministration of righteousnes exceede in glory. ¶The Gospel. Mark. vii. IEsus departed from the coastes of Tire and Sidon and came vnto the sea of Galile through the myd∣dest of the coastes of the tenne Cyties, and they brought vnto hym one that was deafe, and had an impediment in hys speeche, and they prayed hym to
put his hand vpon hym. And when he had taken him aside from ye people, he put his fingers into his eares, & did spit and touched his toung, and looked vp to hea∣uen and sighed, and sayd vnto him: Ephata, that is to say: be opened. And straight way his eares wer opened and the string of his toung was loosed, and he spake plaine. And he commaunded them that they should tell no man. But the more he forbad them, so much the more a great deale they published saying: He hath done althings well, he hath made both the deafe to heare, and the dum to speake. ¶The .xiiii sunday after Trinity sunday. The Epistle. Gala. iii. TO Abraham & his seede were the promises made. He saith not in his seedes as of many: but in thy sede as of one, which is Christ. This I say, yt the law which began afterward, beyonde foure hundred & thirty yeares, doth not disanul the testament that was confirmed afore of God vnto Christward, to make the promise of none effect. For if the inheritaunce come of the law, it cōmeth not now of promise. But God gaue it to Abraham by promise. Wherfore then serueth the law? the law was added because of transgression (tyll the seede came to whom the promise was made) and it was ordained by angels in the hand of a mediatour. A mediatour is not a Mediatour of one, but God is one. Is the law then against the promise of God? God for∣byd. For if there had bene a law geuē which could haue geuen lyfe, then do doubte righteousnes should haue come by the law. But the Scripture concludeth al∣thinges vnder syn, that the promise by the faith of Ie∣sus Christ should be geuen to them that beleue.
¶The Gospell. Luke. x. HAppy are the eies which see the things that ye see For I tell you that many Prophetes and kinges haue desyred to see those things which ye se, and haue not seene them, and to heare those things which ye heare, and haue not heard them. And beholde, a cer∣taine Lawyer stood vp and tempted him saying: Mai∣ster, what shall I do to enherite eternall lyfe? He sayd vnto him: what is written in the law? How readest thou? And he answered and said: Loue the Lord thy God with all thy hart, and with all thy soule, and with al thy strength, and with all thy mind: and thy neigh∣bour as thy selfe. And he said vnto him: thou hast aun∣swered right. This do, and thou shalt liue. But he wil∣ling to iustify himself, sayd vnto Iesus: and who is my neighbour? Iesus answered and said: A certaine man descended from Ierusalem ro Hiericho, and fel among theeues, which robbed him of his raiment, and woun∣ded him and departed, leauing him halfe dead. And it chaunced that there came downe a certaine priest that same way, and when he saw him, he passed by. And like¦wise a Leuit, when he went nye to the place, came and looked on him, and passed by. But a certayne Samari∣tan as he iourneied, came vnto him, and when he saw him, he had compassion on him, and went to him, and bound vp his woundes, and poured in oyle and wyne, and set him on his owne beast, and brought him to a common Inne, and made prouision for hym. And on the morow, when he departed he tooke out two penre, & gaue them to the hoaste and sayd vnto him: Take cure of him, and whatsoeuer thou spendest more when I come againe, I will recompence thee. Which now
of these three thinkest thou was neighboure vnto him that fell amonge the theeues? And he sayd vnto him: he that shewed mercy on hym. Then sayd Iesus to him: go and do thou likewise. ¶The .xiiii. sunday after Trinitie Sunday. The Epistle. Galarh. v. I Say, walke in the spirite, and fulfill not the lust of the flesh, for the flesh lusteth contrarye to the spiritr, and the spirit contrary to the flesh: these are contra∣ry one to another, so that ye cannot do what so euer ye would. But and if ye be led of the Spirite, then are yee not vnder the law. The deedes of the flesh are manifest, which are these: adultery, fornication, vn∣cleanesse, wantonnes, worshipping of images, witch∣crafte, hatred, variaunce, zeale, wrath, stryfe, sedici∣ons, sectes, enuiynge, murder, dronkennes, glutto∣nye, and such lyke. Of the which I tell you before as I haue told you in tymes past, that they which com∣mit such thinges, shall not bee inheritours of the king∣dome of God. Contrarily, the fruite of the Spirit is loue, ioye, peace, longsuffering, gentlenesse, good∣nes, faythfulnes, meekenes, temperaunce. Against such there is no law. They truly that are Christes, haue crucified the flesh with the affections and lustes. ¶The Gospel. Luke. xvii. ANd it chaunced as Iesus went to Ierusalem, that he passed through Samaria and Galile. And as he entred into a certaine town, there met him ten men that were Lepers, which stood a farre of and put forth their voyces, and sayd: Iesus Maister haue
mercy on vs. When he saw them, he sayd vnto them: go shew your selues vnto the Priestes. And it came to passe, that as they went they were cleansed. And one of them, when hee saw that hee was clensed, tur∣ned back againe, and wyth a loud voice praised God, and fell downe on his face at his feete and gaue him thankes. And the same was a Samaritane. And Iesus answered, and said: are there not ten clensed? but where are those nine? There are not found that returned againe to geue God prayse, saue onely thys Straunger. And he sayd vnto hym: aryse go thy way thy faith hath made thee whole. ¶The .xv. Sunday after Trinity Sunday. The Epistle. Gala. iii. YE see how large a Letter I haue written to you with mine own hand. As many as desire with outward appearaunce to please carnally, the same constraine you to be circumcised onely, least they should suffer persecution for the Crosse of Christ. For they them selues which are circumcised, keepe not the law, but desyre to haue you circumcised, that they might re∣ioyce in your flesh. God forbid that I shuld reioyce, but in the crosse of our Lord Iesu Christ, wherby ye world is crucified vnto me, & I vnto the world. For in Christ Iesu neither circumcision auaileth any thing at al, nor vncircumcision, but a new creature. And as many as walke according vnto this rule, peace be on them, and mercy, and vpon Israell that partaineth to God. From hence forth, let no man put me to busines: For I beare in my body the markes of the Lord Iesu. Brethren the grace of our lord Iesu Christ be with your spirit. Amen
¶The Gospell. Math. vi. NO man can serue two maisters: for either he shal hate the one, and loue the other, or els leane to the one, and despise the other: yee cannot serue God and Mamon. Therefore I say vnto you: be not carefull for your lyfe, what ye shall eate or drinke: or yet for your body, what rayment you shall put on. Is not the lyfe more woorth then meate? and the body more of value then raiment? Behold the foules of the ayre, for they sow not, neither do they reape, nor cary into barens: and your heauenly father feedeth them. Are ye not much better then they? Which of you (by taking carefull thought) can adde one cubite vnto hys stature? And why care ye for rayment? Consider the Lillies of the field how they growe: they labour not, neither do thy spinne. And yet I say vnto you, that e∣uen Salomon in all his roialtye, was not clothed lyke one of these: Wherefore, if God so cloth the grasse of the field (which though it stand to day, is to morowe cast into the fornace:) shall he not much more do the same for you, O ye of little fayth? Therefore take no thought saying: what shall we eate? or what shall we drinke? or where with shall we be cloathed? after all these things do the Gentiles seeke. For your heauen∣lye Father knoweth that ye haue neede of all these thinges. But rather seeke yee fyrst the kyngdome of God, and the righteousnes therof, and all these things shall bee ministred vnto you. Care not then for the mo∣rowe, for to morowe day shall care for it selfe, sufficient vnto the day, is the trauaile thereof. ¶The .xvi. Sunday after Trinity Sunday. The Epistle. Ephe. iii.
I Desire that you faynt not because of my tribulati∣ons that I suffer for your sakes, which is your prayse. For thys cause I bowe my knees vnto the Father of our lord Iesus Christ, which is Father of al that is called Father in heauen and in earth, that he would graunt you according to the ritches of his glo∣ry, that ye may be strengthned with might by his spi∣rit in the inner man, that Christ may dwell in your hartes by fayth, that ye being rooted and grounded in loue, might be able to comprehende with all Saintes, what is the bredth, length, depth and height, and to know the excellēt loue of the knowledge of Christ, that ye might be fulfilled with all fulnes, which commeth of God. Vnto hym that is able to do exceding aboun∣dantly aboue all that we aske or thinke, according to the power that worketh in vs, be prayse in the congre∣gacion by Christ Iesus throughout all generations from time to time. Amen. ¶The Gospell. Luke. vii. ANd it fortuned that Iesus went into a city cal∣led Naim, and many of his disciples went with him, and much people. When he came nye to the gate of the City: behold there was a man caried out which was the onely Sonne of his mother, and she was a widow, and much people of the City was with her. And when the Lord saw her, he had compassion on her, and sayd vnto her: weepe not. And he came nie and touched the coffin, and they that bare him stood still. And he sayde: yong man I say vnto thee, arise. And hee that was dead sat vp, and began to speake. And he deliuered him to his mother. And there came a feare on them all. And they gaue the glory vnto God,
saying: a great Prophet is risen vp amonge vs, and God hath visited his people. And this rumour of him went foorth throughout all Iewry and throughout all the regions which lye rounde about. ¶The .xvii. sunday after Trinitie Sunday. The Epistle. Ephc. iiii. I (Which am a prisoner of the Lordes) exhort you, that ye walke woorthy of the vocation wherwith ye are called, with all lowlynes and meekenes, with humblenes of mind, forbearing one another through loue, and be diligent to keepe the vnity of the spirit through the bond of peace, being one body and Spi∣rite, euen as ye are called in one hope of your calling. Let there be but one Lord, one fayth, one Baptisme, one God and Father of all, which is aboue all, and through all, and in you all. ¶The Gospell. Luke. xiiii. IT chaunced that Iesus went into the house of one of the chiefe Pharises to eate breade on the Sab∣both day: and they watched him. And behold there was a certaine man before him which had the dropsy. And Iesus aunswered & spake vnto the Lawiers and Phariseis, saying: is it lawfull to heale on the Sab∣both day? And they helde their peace. And he tooke hym and healed him, and let him goe, and answered them saying: which of you shal haue an asse or an Oxe fallen into a pyt, and wyll not straight way pull him out on the Sabboth day? And they could not aunswer him againe to these thinges. He put forth also a simi∣litude to the geastes, when he marked how they prea∣sed to be in the highest roumes, and sayd vnto them:
When thou art bidden to a wedding of any man, syt not down in the hiest roume, least a more honourable man then thou be bidden of hym, and he (that had him and thee) come and say to thee: geue thys man roume▪ and thou begyn with shame to take the lowest roume. But rather when thou art bidden, go and sit in the lo∣west roume, that when he that bad thee, commeth, he may say vnto thee: friend, syt vp higher. Then shalt thou haue worship in the presence of them that syt at meate with thee. For whosoeuer exalteth hym selfe, shalbe brought low, and he that humbleth hym selfe, shalbe exalted. ¶The .xviii. sunday after Trinity sunday. The Epistle. i. Cor. iii. I Thanke my God alwayes on your behalfe for the grace of God which is geuen you by Iesus Christ, that in all thinges ye are made rytche by hym in all vtteraunce, and in all knowledge: by the which things the testimony of Iesus Christ was confyrmed in you: so that yee are behind in no gyft, wayting for the ap∣pearing of our Lord Iesus Christ, which shall also strength you to the ende, that you maye be blame∣les in the daye of the comming of our Lord Iesus Christ. ¶The Gospell. Math. xvi. WHen the Phariseis had heard that Iesus did put the Saduces to scilence, they came toge∣ther: and one of them (which was a doctor of law) asked him a question, tempting hym and saying: Maister, which is the greatest commaunde∣ment
in the law? Iesus sayd vnto him. Thou shalt loue thy Lord God with all thy hart, and with all thy soule, and with al thy mind. This is the fyrst and grea∣test commaundement: And the second is like vnto it. Thou shalt loue thy neighbour as thy selfe. In these two commaundements hang all the law and the Pro∣phetes. While the Pharises gathered together, Iesus asked them saying: what thinke ye of Christ, whose sonne is he? They said vnto him: the Sonne of Da∣uid. He sayd vnto them: how then doth Dauid in spi∣rite call hym lord saying: The Lord said vnto my Lord sit thou on my right hand till I make thine ennemies thy footestoole: If Dauid then call him Lord, how is he then his Sonne? And no man was able to answer him any thing, neither durst any man (from that day foorth) aske hym any mo questions. ¶The .xix. sunday after Trinity sunday. The Epistle. Ephe. iiii. THis I say and testify through the Lord, that ye hence forth walke not as other Gentiles walke, in vanity of their mind, while thei ar blinded in their vnderstanding, being far frō a godly life, by the meanes of the ignorance that is in them, & because of the blind∣nes of their hartes, which being past repentance, haue geuen thē selues ouer vnto wantōnes, to worke al ma∣ner of vnclennes, euē with gredines. But ye haue not so learned Christ, if so be that ye haue heard of him, & haue bene taught in him, as the truth is in Iesu (as concerning the conuersacion in times past) to lay from you the old man, which is corrupt, according to the de∣ceiuable lusts. To be renued also in the spirit of your mind, and to put on that new man, which after God is
shapen in righteousnes and true holynes. Wherfore put away lying, and speake euery man truth vnto his neighbour, forasmuch as we are members one of ano∣ther. Be angry and synne not. Let not the sunne go down vpon your wrath, neither geue place to the back biter. Let hym that stole, steale no more: but let him rather labour wyth hys handes the thinge whych is good, that he may geue hym that needeth. Let not fylthye communication proceede out of your mouth. But that which is good to edefy with all, as oft as neede is, that it may minister grace vnto the hearers, and greue not the holy spirit of God, by whom ye are sealed vnto the day of redemption. Let all bitternes, & fearcenes, and wrath, and roaring, and cursed spea∣king, be put away from you, with all malicyousnes. Be ye courteous one to another, mercyfull, forgeuing one another, euen as God for Christes sake hath for∣geuen you. ¶The Gospell. Math. vii. IEsus entred into a shyp and passed ouer, and came into hys owne City: And beholde they brought to him a man sycke of the Paulsey, lying in a bedde. And when Iesus saw the faith of them, he said to the sycke of the Paulsey: Sonne be of good chere, thy synnes be forgeuen thee. And behold, certaine of the Scrybes sayd within them selues: this man blasphe∣meth. And when Iesus saw their thoughts he sayd, wherefore thinke you euill in your harts? whether is it easyer to say, thy synnes be forgeuen thee, or to say, arise and walke? But that ye may know that the son of man hath power to forgeue synnes in earth. Then sayth hee to the sicke of the Palsey: Arise, take vp thy
bed and go vnto thine house. And he arose and depar∣ted to his house: But the people that saw it, maruey∣led, and gloryfied God, which hath geuen such power vnto men. ¶The .xx. Sunday after Trinity Sunday. The Epistle. Ephe. v. TAke heede therefore how ye walke circumspectly: not as vnwise, but as wise men redeeming the time, because the dayes are euill. Wherfore, be ye not vnwise but vnderstand what the will of the Lord is, and be not dronken with wyne, wherein is excesse. But bee ye fylled with the spirite, speaking vnto your selues in Psalmes and Himnes, and spirituall songs, synging and making melody to the Lorde in your hartes, geuing thankes alwayes for all thinges vn∣to God the Father in the name of our Lord Ie∣sus Christ: submitting your selues one to another in the feare of God. ¶The Gospell. Math. xx. IEsus sayd to hys Disciples. The kingdome of heauen is lyke vnto a man that was a king which made a mariage for hys sonne, and sent foorth hys seruauntes to call them that were bidden to the wedding, and they would not come. Againe hee sent foorth other seruauntes, saying: Tell them which are bidden, behold I haue prepared my dinner, myne Oxen and my fatlinges are killed, and althings ar ready, come vnto the mariage. But they made light of it, & went their waies: One to his farme place, ano∣ther to his marchaundise, and the other oke his ser∣uants, and intreated them shamefully, and slew them.
But when the kyng heard thereof, he was wroth, and sent forth hys men of warre, and destroyed those mur∣therers, and brent vp theyr City. Then sayd he to his seruauntes: The mariage in deede is prepared, but they which wer bidden, were not worthy. Go ye ther∣fore out into the hye wayes, and as many as ye fynde, byd them to the Mariage. And the seruauntes went foorth into the hye wayes, and gathered together all, as many as they could fynde, both good and bad. And the weddyng was furnished with gestes. Then the kyng came in to see the gestes, and when he spyed ther a man which had not on a wedding garment, he sayde vnto hym: Friende, how cammest thou in hether, not hauing a wedding garment? And he was euen spech∣les. Then sayde the kyng to the ministers: Take and bynde hym hand & foote, and cast hym into vtter dark∣nes, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. For many are called, but few be chosen. ¶The .xxi. sunday after Trinity sunday. The Epistle. Ephe. vi. MY brethren, be strong through the Lord, & tho∣row the power of his myght. Put on all the ar∣mour of God, that ye may stand agaynst all the assaultes of the Deuyll. For we wrestle not agaynst bloud and fleshe, but agaynst rule, agaynst power, a∣gainst worldly rulers, euen gouernors of the darknes of this world, agaynst spirituall craftynes in heauenly thinges. Wherfore take vnto you the whole armour of God, that ye may be able to resist in the euyll day, and stand perfect in althinges. Stand therfore and your loines gyrt with the truth, hauing on the brest plate of righteousnes, & hauing shoes on you feete, yt ye may be
prepared for the Gospel of peace. Aboue all take to you the shield of fayth, wherewith ye may quentch all the firy dartes of the wicked. And take the helmet of sal∣uation, and the sword of the spirit, which is the woord of God. And pray alwaies with al maner of praier and supplication in the spirit, and watch therunto with all instaunce and supplications for all Sayntes, and for me, that vtterance may be geuen vnto me, that I may open my mouth freely to vtter the secretes of my Gos∣pel (wherof I am a messenger in bondes) that therein I may speake freely as I ought to speake. ¶The Gospel. Iohn. iiii. THere was a certayne Ruler, whose sonne was sicke at Capernaum, assoone as the same heard that Iesus was come out of Iewry into Galile, hee went vnto hym, and besought hym that he would come downe and heale his sonne: for he was euen at the poynt of death. Then sayd Iesus vnto him: except ye see signes and wonders, ye wyl not beleue. The ru∣ler sayd vnto him: Syr, come downe or euer that my sonne dye. Iesus said vnto him: go thy way thy sonne lyueth. The man beleued the woord that Iesus had spoken vnto hym. And he went hys way, and as hee was going downe, the seruauntes met hym, and told hym saying: thy sonne lyueth. Then enquired hee of them the houre when he began to amende. And they sayd vnto him: yesterday at the seuenth houre the fe∣uer left him. So the father knew that it was the same houre, in the which Iesus sayd vnto him: Thy sonne lyueth. And he beleued, and all his houshold. This is agayne the seconde myracle that Iesus dyd when hee was come out of Iewry into Galile.
¶The .xxiii. sunday after Trinity sunday. The Epistle. Phi. i. I Thanke my God with all remembraunce of you al∣waies in all my praiers for you, and pray with glad∣nes. Because ye are come into the felowship of the Gospell, from the fyrst day vntill now. And am surely certified of this, that hee which hath begone a good woorke in you, shall performe it vntill the day of Iesus Christ, as it becommeth me that I should so iudge of you all, because I haue you in my hart: for somuch as ye are all companions of grace with me, euen in my bonds and in the defending and establishing of the gos∣pell: for God is my record how greatly I longe after you all, from the verye hart roote in Iesus Christ. And thys I praye, that your loue may encrease yet more & more in knowledge, and in all vnderstanding, that ye may accept the thinges that are most excellent, that ye may be pure, and such as offend no man, vntyll the day of Christ, being fylled with the fruit of righte∣ousnes, which commeth by Iesus Christ vnto the glo∣ry and prayse of God. ¶The Gospell. Math. xviii. PEter sayd vnto Iesus: Lord, how ofte shall I for∣geue my brother, if he synne against me, til seuen times? Iesus saith vnto him: I say not vnto thee vntill seuen tymes, but seuenty tymes seuen tymes. Therefore is the kingdome of heauen likened vnto a certaine man that was a king, which would take ac∣coumptes of his seruaunts. And when he had begon to recken, one was brought vnto hym which oughte
him tenne thousande talentes: but forasmuch as hee was not able to pay, his Lord commaunded him to be solde, and hys wyfe and children, and all that he had, and payment to be made. The seruaunt fell downe, and besought hym saying: Syr haue pacience wyth me, and I wyll pay thee all. Then had the Lord pity on that seruaunt, and loosed hym, and forgaue hym the debt. So the same seruaunt went out, and found one of hys fellowes whych ought hym an hundred pence, and he layde handes on hym, and tooke hym by the throte, saying: paye that thou owest. And hys fel∣low fell downe and besought hym, saying: haue paci∣ence with me, and I wyll pay thee all. And he would not, but went and cast him into pryson, tyll hee should pay the debt. So when hys fellowes saw what was done, they were verye sorye, and came and tolde vnto theyr Lorde all that had happened. Then the Lorde called hym, and sayde vnto hym: O thou vngracious seruaunt, I forgaue thee all that debt when thou de∣syredst me: shouldest not thou also haue had compassi∣on on thy fellowe, euen as I had pitye on thee? And hys Lord was wrothe, and delyuered hym to the Iai∣lers, tyll hee shoulde paye all that was due vnto hym. So lykewyse shall my heauenly Father doo also vnto you, if ye from your hartes forgeue not (euery one his brother) their trespasses. ¶The .xxiii. sunday after Trinity sunday. The Epistle. Philip. iii. BRethren, be followers together of me, and looke on them whych walke euen so as ye haue vs for
an ensample. For many walke, of whom I haue told you often, and now tell you weeping, that they are the enemies of the crosse of Christ, whose ende is damna∣tion, whose belly is their God, & glory to their shame, which are worldly mynded. But our conuersation is in heauen, from whence we looke for the sauiour, euen the Lord Iesus Christ, which shall chaunge our vyle body, that he may make it lyke vnto hys gloryous bo∣dy, according to the working, whereby he is able also to subdue all thinges vnto hym selfe. ¶The Gospell. Math. xxii. THen the Pharisies went out, and tooke counsayl how they might tangle hym in his wordes. And they sent out vnto hym their disciples wyth He∣rodes Seruauntes saying: Mayster, wee knowe that thou art true, and teachest the way of God truly, ney∣ther carest thou for anye man, for thou regardest not the outwarde appearaunce of men: Tell vs therefore how thinkest thou, is it lawfull that tribute be geuen vnto Ceasar, or not? But Iesus perceyuing theyr wickednes, sayde: Why tempt ye me you hipocrites? shew me the tribute money. And they tooke hym a pe∣ny. And he sayd vnto them: whose is this image and superscription? They sayd vnto hym Ceasars. Then sayd hee vnto them: geue therefore vnto Ceasar, the things which are Cesars: and vnto God those things which are Gods. When they heard these words, they marueiled and left hym, and went theyr way. ¶The .xxiiii. sunday after Trinity sunday.
The Epistle. Colos. i. WE geue thankes to God the father of our Lord Iesus Christ alwaies for you in our prayers, for we haue heard of your fayth in Christ Ie∣su, and of the loue which ye beare to all Sayntes, for the hopes sake which is layd vp in store for you in hea∣uen: Of which hope ye heard before by the true word of the Gospell, which is come vnto you, euen as it is fruitfull, and groweth, as it is also among you, from the day in the which ye heard of it, and had experience in the grace of God through the truth, as ye learned of Epaphra our deare fellowe seruaunt, whych is for you a faythfull Minister of Christ, which also declared vnto vs your loue which ye haue in the spirit. For this cause we also, euer synce the day we heard of it, haue not ceased to pray for you, and to desire that ye might be fulfilled with the knowledge of hys wyl, in all wys∣dome and spirituall vnderstandyng, that ye myght walke woorthye of the Lorde, that in all thynges ye may please, beyng fruitfull in all good workes, and in∣creasing in the knowledge of God, strengthened with all might through his gloryous power, vnto all paci∣ence & long suffering with ioyfulnes, geuing thankes vnto the Father which hath made vs meete to be par∣takers of the inheritance of Saintes in light. ¶The Gospell. Math. ix. WHen Iesus spake vnto the people, behold ther came a certaine Ruler, and worshipped hym saying: My daughter is euen now deceased, but come and lay thy hand vpon her, and she shal lyue. And Iesus arose and followed hym, and so dyd hys
Disciples. And behold, a woman which was diseased with an issue of blond twelue yeres, came behind him, and touched the hem of his vesture. For she sayd with∣in herselfe: If I may touch but euen his vesture onely, I shall be safe. But Iesus turned him about, and when he saw her, he sayd: daughter, be of good comfort, thy fayth hath made thee safe. And the woman was made whole euen the same tyme. And when Iesus came into the rulers house, and saw the Minstrels and people making a noyse, he sayd vnto them: get you hence, for the maid is not dead but sleepeth. And they laughed him to scorne. But when the people were put foorth, he went in, and tooke her by the hand, and sayd damosell aryse. And the damosell arose. And this noyse went abrode into all that land. ¶The .xxv. sunday after Trinity sunday. The Epistle. Iere. xxiii. BEhold the time commeth, sayth the Lord, that I wyll rayse vp the righteous braunch of Dauid, which Kyng shall beare rule, and he shall prosper with wisedome, and shall set vp equity and righteous∣nes againe in earth. In his time shall Iuda be saued, and Israell shall dwell without feare. And thys is the name that they shall call him, euen the Lord our righ∣teousnes: and therefore behold, the tyme commeth sayth the Lord, that it shal be no more sayd, the Lord lyueth which brought the children of Israell out of the land of Egypt: But the Lord liueth which brought foorth and lead the seede of the house of Israell out of the North land, and from all countries where I haue scattered them, and they shall dwell in their own land agayne.
¶The Gospell. Iohn. vi. WHen Iesus lyft vp his eyes, and saw a great company come vnto him, he sayd vnto Philip: whēce shal we buy bread that these may eate? This he said to proue him, for he himselfe knew what he would do. Philip aunswered hym: two hundreth peniworth of bread are not sufficient for them, that e∣uery man may take a little. One of his disciples (An∣drewe, Simon Peters brother) sayd vnto him: There is a lad here, which hath fiue barly loaues and two fi∣shes: but what are they among so many? And Iesus sayd make the people sit down. There was much gras in the place. So the men sat downe in number about fyue thousand. And Iesus tooke the breade, and when he had geuen thankes, he gaue to the disciples, and the disciples to them that were set downe. And likewise of the fishes as much as they would. When they had ea∣ten inough, he sayd vnto his disciples: Gather vp the broken meate which remayneth, that nothing be lost. And they gathered it together, and fylled twelue bas∣kets with the broken meate of the fyue barely loues, which broken meate remained vnto them that had ea∣ten. Then those men (when they had seene the miracle that Iesus did) sayd: thys is of a truth the same Pro∣phet that should come into the world. ¶Saint Andrew the Apostles day. The Epistle. Roma. x. IF thou knowledge with thy mouth that Iesus is the Lord▪ & beleue in thy hart that God raised him vp from death, thou shalt be safe. For to beleue with the hart iustifieth, & to knowledge with the mouth, ma∣keth a man safe. For the scripture saith: whosoeuer be∣leueth
on him, shal not be confounded. There is no dif∣ference betwene the Iewe and the Gentile. For one is Lord of al, which is ritch vnto al that cal vpon him. For whosoeuer doth cal on the name of the lord, shalbe safe. How then shal they cal on him, on whom they haue not beleued? How shal thei beleue on him on whō thei haue not hearde? How shall they heare without a Preacher? And how shall they preache except they be sent? As it is wrytten: how beautifull are the feete of them which bring tydinges of peace, and bring tidinges of good things? But they haue not al obeyed to the gospell. For Esay saith: Lord who hath beleued our sayings? So then fayth commeth by hearing, and hearing cōmeth by the word of God. But I aske: haue they not heard? No doubt their sound went out into al lands, and their words into the ends of the world. But I demaūd whe∣ther Israel did know or not. First Moyses saith: I wil prouoke you to enuy, by thē that are no people, by a foo∣lish nation I wyll anger you. Esay after that is bold & faith: I am foūd of them yt sought me not. I am mani∣fest vnto them yt asked not after me, but against Israel he saith: Al day long haue I stretched forth my hands to a people that beleueth not, but speaketh against me. ¶The Gospell. Math. iiii. AS Iesus walked by ye sea of Galile, he saw two bre¦thren: Simon which was called Peter & Andrew his brother, casting a net into the sea (for they were fis∣shers) & he saith vnto thē: folow me, & I will make you to become fishers of men. And they strait way left their nets and folowed him. And when he was gone foorth from thence, he saw other two brethren, Iames the sonne of Zebede, and Iohn hys brother, in the ship
with Zebede theyr father mending their nettes, and he called them. And they immediatly left the ship and theyr father, and folowed him. ¶Saint Thomas Apostles day. The Epistle. Ephe. ii. NOw ye are not straungers nor foreners, but cite∣zens with the sayntes, and of the housholde of God: and are buylt vpon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Iesus Christ himselfe being the head corner stone: in whom what bulding soeuer is coupeled together, it groweth vnto an holy temple of the Lord: in whom also ye are builte together to be an habitacion of God through the holy Ghost. ¶The Gospell. Iohn. xx. THomas one of the twelue, which is called Didi∣mus, was not with them when Iesus came. The other disciples therefore said vnto him: we haue seene the Lord. But he sayd vnto them: except I see in his handes the print of the nailes, and put my finger into the print of the nailes, and thrust my hand into his syde, I wyl not beleue. And after eight dayes againe his Disciples were within, and Thomas with them. Then came Iesus when the doores were shut, and stood in the middest and sayd: peace be vnto you. And after that he sayd to Thomas: bring thy fynger hither, and see my handes, and reach thy hand and thrust it into my syde, and be not faithles, but bele∣uing. Thomas aunswered and sayd vnto hym: my Lord and my God, Iesus sayd vnto hym: Thomas, because thou hast seene me, thou hast beleued: blessed are they that haue not seene and yet haue beleued. And many other signes trulye did Iesus in the presence of
his disiples, which are not writtē in this booke. These are written that ye might beleue that Iesus Christ is the sonne of God, and that (in beleuing) ye might haue lyfe through his name. ¶The Conuertion of Saynt Paule. The Epistle. Actes. ix. ANd Saule yet breathing out threatnings and slaughter against the disciples of the Lord: went vnto the high Priest, and desired of him letters to cary to Damasco to the Sinagoges: that if he found any of thys way (were they men or women) he might bring thē bound to Ierusalem. And when he iournied, it fortuned yt as he was come nigh to Damasco, soden∣ly there shined round about him a lyght from heauen, & he fell to the earth, & herd a voyce saying to him: Saul Saul why persecutest thou me? And he sayd: what art thou Lorde? And the Lord sayd: I am Iesus whom thou persecutest. It is hard for thee to kicke against the pricke. And he both trembling and astonied, said: Lord what wylt thou haue me to do? And the lord sayd vnto him aryse and go into the City, and it shalbe told thee what thou must do. The men which iourneyed with hym stood amased, hearing a voyce, but seeing no man. And Saule arose from the earth, and when he opened his eyes, he saw no man. But they led him by the hand, and brought him into Damasco. And he was three dayes without sight, and neither did eate nor drinke. And there was a certaine disciple at Damasco, named Ananias, and to him sayd the Lord in a vision: Anani∣as, & he sayd behold, I am here Lord. And the Lord sayd vnto him: arise & go into the streete which is cal∣led streight: & seeke in the house of Iudas after one
called Saul of Tharsus. For behold he praieth, & hath sene in a vision a man named Ananias, comming vnto him, and putting his handes on him, that he might re∣ceiue his syght. Then Ananias aunswered: Lord, I haue heard by many of this man, howe much euyll he hath done to thy Saints at Ierusalem: & here he hath authority of the hye Priests to binde all that cal on thy name. The Lord said vnto him: go thy way, for he is a chosen vessell vnto me, to beare my name before the Gentiles & kings, and the childrē of Israel. For I wyl shew hym how great thynges hee must suffer for my names sake. And Ananias went his way, & entred in∣to the house, and put his handes on him, & sayd: Bro∣ther Saul, the Lord that appeared vnto thee in ye way as thou cāmest, hath sent me that thou mightest receue thy sight, & be filled with the holy Ghost. And immedi∣atly ther fel from his eyes as it had bene scales, and he receiued syght, & arose, and was baptised, & receiued meate, and was comforted. Then was Saul a certain dayes wyth the Disciples whych were at Damasco. And straightway he preached Christ in the Sinagogs how that he was the sonne of God. But all that heard him wer amased and said: Is not this he that spoyled them which called on this name in Ierusalem, & came hether for that intent that he might bring them bound vnto the hye Priestes? But Saul encreased the more in strength, and confounded the Iewes which dwelt at Damasco, affirming that this was very Christ. ¶The Gospell. Math. xix. PEter answered and sayd vnto Iesus: Behold, we haue forsaken all and folowed thee, what shall we haue therfore? Iesus sayde vnto them: Verely I
say vnto you, that when the sonne of man shal syt in ye seate of his Maiestye, ye that haue folowed me in the regeneration, shal syt also vpon .xij. seates, & iudge the twelue tribes of Israel. And euery one that forsaketh house, or brethren, or systers, or Father or Mother, or wife or children, or landes for my names sake, shall re∣ceiue an hundred fold, & shall inherite euerlasting lyfe. But many that ar first, shalbe last, & the last shalbe first. ¶The Purification of the virgin Mary. The Epistle. Mala. iii. BEhold I send my Messenger which shall prepare the way before me, and sodaynlye shall the Lord whō ye seeke come vnto his temple, & the messen∣ger of the couenant whom ye desire. Behold he cōmeth saith the Lord of Saboth: Who shall endure in ye day of his cōming, or who shal stand to behold him? For he is as a trying fire, & as the herbe that Fullers scoure withal, and he shal syt trying & purging siluer, and shal purify the sonnes of Leuy, and shal fine them as gold & syluer, and they shal bring offerings vnto the Lord of ryghteousnes, and the Sacrifice of Iuda and Ierusa∣lem shall be delicious vnto the Lord, as in the old time and in the yeares that were in the beginning. ¶The Gospell. Luke ii. WHen the time of their purification (after the law of Moyses) was come, they brought him to Ierusa∣lem to present him to the Lord (as it is written in the law of the Lord: Euery Manchilde that first openeth the Matrix, shal be called holy to the Lord,) & to offer (as it is sayd in the law of the Lord) a paire of Turtle doues, or .ii. yong Pigeons. And behold ther was a mā in Ierusalē, whose name was Simeon. And the same man was iust & godly, and looked for the consolation of
Israel, and the holy ghost, was in him. And an answer had he receiued of the holy Ghost, that he should not see death, except he fyrst saw the Lord Christ. And he came by inspiration into the temple. ¶Saynt Mathies day. The Epistle. Actes. i. IN those dayes Peter stood vp in the midst of the dis∣ciples and sayd: the number of names that were to∣gether, were about an hundred and twenty. Ye men and brethren, the scripture must needes haue bene ful∣filled, which the holy ghost, through the mouth of Da∣uid spake before of Iudas, which was guide to them that tooke Iesus. For he was nombred with vs, and had obtayned felowship in this Ministration. And the same hath now possessed a plot of ground, with the re∣ward of iniquity: & when he was hanged, he burst a sunder in the middest, and his bowels gushed out. And it was knowen vnto all the inhabiters of Hierusalem: in so much that the same fielde is called in their mother tounge, Acheldema, that is to say: the bloudy fielde. For it is written in the booke of Psalmes: his habitation be voyd, & no man be dwelling therein, and his bishop∣ricke let another take. Wherefore, of these men which haue companied with vs (al the time that the Lord Ie¦sus had all his conuersation among vs, beginning at ye Baptisme of Iohn vnto ye same day that he was taken vp from vs) must one be ordeined to be a witnes with vs of his resurrection. And they appointed two, Ioseph which is called Barsabas whose sirname was Iustus and Mathias. And when they prayed they sayd. Thou Lord which knowest the hartes of all men, shew whe∣ther of these two thou hast chosen, that he may take the
roume of thys Ministration and Apostleshyp, from which Iudas by transgression fell, that he might go to his owne place. And they gaue foorth theyr lots, and the lot fell on Mathias, and he was coumpted with the eleuen Apostles. ¶The Gospell. Math. xi. IN that time Iesus answered and sayd: I thanke thee, O Father, Lord of heauen and earth, because thou hast hyd these thinges from the wyse and pru∣dent, and hast shewed them vnto babes: Verely Fa∣ther, euen so was it thy good pleasure. All things are geuen vnto me of my father. And no man knoweth the Sonne, but the Father, neither knoweth any man the Father, saue the Sonne, and he to whom soeuer the sonne will open him. Come vnto me all ye that labour and are laden, and I wyll ease you. Take my yoke vp∣on you, and learne of me, for I am meeke and lowly in hart, and ye shall fynde rest vnto your soules, for my yoke is easy, and my burden is lyght. ¶The Annunciation of the virgin Mary. The Epistle. Esay. vii. GOd spake once again vnto Ahaz saying: require a token of the lord thy God, whether it be toward the depth beneath, or toward the heyght aboue. Then sayd Ahaz: I wyll require none, neyther will I tempt the Lord. And he sayd harken to, ye of the house of Dauid, is it not inough for you that ye be greeuous vnto men, but ye must greeue my God also? And ther∣fore the Lord shall geue you a token: Behold, a vyrgin shal conceaue & beare a sonne, & thou his mother shalt cal his name Emanuel. Butter & hony shal he eate, that he may know to refuse the euill, and chuse the good.
¶The Gospel. Luke. i. ANd in the syxt moneth, the Aungel Gabriell was sent from God vnto a City of Galile, named Na∣zareth, to a virgin spoused to a man whose name was Ioseph, of the house of Dauid, and the virgins name was Marye. And the Angell went in vnto her and sayd: Hayle full of grace, the Lord is with thee: Blessed art thou among women. When shee saw him, shee was abashed at his saying, and caste in her minde what maner of salutation that should be. And the An∣gell sayd vnto her: feare not Mary, for thou hast found grace with God. Behold, thou shalt conceyue in thy wombe, and beare a Sonne, and shalt call hys name Iesus: He shalbe great, and shalbe called the sonne of the highest. And the Lord God shall geue vnto hym the seate of his Father Dauid, and he shall reigne ouer the house of Iacob for euer, and of his kingdome there shalbe none ende. Then sayd Mary to the Aungell: How shall this be, seeing I know not a man? And the Angell answered, & said vnto her: The holy ghost shal come vpon thee, and the power of the hyest shall ouer∣shadow thee. Therfore also that holy thing which shal be borne, shalbe called the son of God. And behold thy Cosin Elizabeth, she hath also conceiued a sonne in her age & this is the sixt moneth, which was called baren for with god nothing shalbe vnpossible. And Mary said behold ye hand maid of the lord, be it vnto me acording to thy woord. And the Angell departed from her. ¶Saynt Markes day. The Epistle. Ephe. iiii. VNto euery one of vs is geuen grace, according to the measure of the gift of Christ. Wherefore he
saith when he went vpon hie, he led captiuity captiue, and gaue gifts vnto men. That he ascended, what mea¦neth it, but that he also descended first into the lowest parts of the earth? He that descended is euen the same also yt ascended vp aboue al heauens, to fulfil althings. And the very same made some Apostles, some Pro∣phets, some Euangelists, some shepheards, & teachers to the edifying of the saints, to the worke and admini∣stratiō, euen to the edifying of ye body of Christ, till we al come to the vnity of the faith & knowledge of the son of God, vnto a perfect man vnto the measure of the ful perfect age of Christ. That we henceforth should be no more children, wauering & caried about wt euery wind of doctrin by ye wilines of mē, through craftines wher¦by they lay awayt for vs to deceiue vs. But let vs folow the truth in loue, and in althings grow in him which is the head euen Christ, in whom if al the body be cou∣pled and knit together, throughout euery ioynt, wher∣with one ministreth to another (according to the opera¦tion, as euery part hath his measure) he encreaseth the body, vnto the edifying of it selfe through loue. ¶The Gospell. Iohn. xv. I Am the true vine, and my father is a husbandman. Euery braunch that beareth not fruit in me he wyll take away. And euery braunch that beareth fruit wil he purge that it may bring foorth more fruit. Now are ye clean through the words which I haue spokē vnto you. Bide in me: & I in you. As the braūch cannot beare fruit of it self except it bide in ye vine: no more can ye ex∣cept ye abide in me. I am ye vine, ye are ye braunches, he that abideth in me, & I in him, ye same bringeth foorth much fruit. For wtout me cā ye do nothing. If a mā bide
not in me, he is cast foorth as a braunch, & is withered And men gather thē, and cast them into the fire, & they burn. If ye abide in me, & my words abide in you, aske what ye wil, and it shal be don for you. Herein is my fa∣ther glorified, yt ye beare much fruit, & become my disci∣ples: As the father hath loued me euen so also haue I loued you. Continue you in my loue. If ye keepe my cō∣maundements, ye shal byde in my loue, euen as I haue kept my fathers commaundements & bide in his loue. These things haue I spoken vnto you, yt my ioy might remaine in you, and that your ioy might be full. ¶Saint Phillip and Iames day. The Epistle. Iames. i. IAmes the seruaunt of God, and of the Lord Iesus Christ, sendeth greting to the twelue Tribes which are scattered abroade. My brethren, count it for an exceeding ioy, when ye fall into diuers temptacions: knowing this, that the trying of your fayth gendreth pacience, and let pacience haue her perfect woorke, that ye may be perfect and sound, lacking nothing. If any of you lack wisdome, let hym aske of hym that geueth it, euen God, which geueth to all men indifferently, and casteth no man in the teeth, and it shal be geuen him. But let hym aske in fayth, and wauer not: for he that doubteth, is lyke a waue of the sea, which is tost of the windes and caried with violence. Neither let that man thinke that he shall receaue any thing of the Lorde. A waueryng mynded man, is vnstable in all hys wayes. Let the brother which is of lowe degree, reioyce when hee is exalted. Againe let hym that is rytch, reioyce when hee is made lowe: For euen as the floure of the grasse shall hee passe awaye.
For as the sun riseth with heat and the gras withereth and his flower falleth away, & the beuty of the fashion of it perysheth: euen so shal the ritch man perish in hys wayes. Happy is the man that endureth temptacion For when he is tried, he shall receiue the crown of lyfe, which the Lord hath promised to them that loue him. ¶The Gospell. Iohn. xiiii. ANd Iesus sayd vnto hys disciples: let not your hartes be troubled, if ye beleue in God, beleue also in me. In my Fathers house are many man∣sions. If it were not so I would haue told you, I go to prepare a place for you. And if I go to prepare a place for you, I wyll come agayne and receiue you euen vnto my selfe: that where I am there may ye be also. And whither I go, you know, and the way ye know. Tho∣mas sayth vnto him: Lord we know not whither thou goest. And how is it possible for vs to know the way? Iesus sayd vnto him, I am the way, and the truth and the life. No man commeth to the father but by me, if ye had knowen me, ye had knowen my Father also. And now ye know him and haue seene him. Phillip said vn∣to him Lord shew vs the father, and it suffiseth vs. Ie∣sus saith vnto him: haue I beene so long time with you, and yet hast thou not knowen me? Philip, he that hath seene me, hath seene my Father: and how saiest thou then, shew vs the Father, beleuest not thou that I am in the father, and the father in me. The words that I speake vnto you, I speake not of my selfe, but the father that dwelleth in mee, is he that doth the workes. Beleue me that I am in the father and the fa∣ther in me: Or els beleue me for the workes sake. Ve∣rely, verely I say vnto you: he that beleueth on me, the
works that I do the same shall he do also, and greater workes then these shal he do, because I go vnto my Fa∣ther. And whatsoeuer ye aske in my name, that wyll I do, that the Father may be glorified by the Sonne. If ye shall aske any thing in my name, I wyl do it. ¶Saynt Barnabes day the Apostle. The Epistle. Actes. xi. TIdinges of these things came vnto the eares of the congregation, which was in Ierusalem. And they sent foorth Barnabas that he should go vn∣to Antioch, whych when he came and had seene the grace of God, was glad, and exhorted them all, that with purpose of hart they would continually cleaue vn∣to the Lorde. For he was a good man, and full of the holy ghost and of fayth, and much people was added vnto the Lord. Thē departed Barnabas to Tharsus, to seke Saule. And whē he had found him, he brought him vnto Antioch. And it chaunced that a whole yeare they had theyr conuersation with the congregation there, and taught much people: in so much that the dis∣ciples of Antioch were the first that were called Chri∣stians. In those dayes came Prophets from the City of Ierusalem vnto Antioch. And there stood vp one of them named Agabus, and signified by the spirit that there should be great dearth throughout all the world which came to pas in the Emperor Claudius dayes. Then the disciples euery man according to theyr abili∣tye, purposed to sende succour vnto the brethren which dwelt in Iewry, whych thing they also dyd, and sent it to the Elders, by the hands of Barnabas and Saule. ¶The Gospell. Iohn. xv. THis is my commaundement, that ye loue toge∣ther as I haue loued you. Greater loue hath no
man then thys, that a man bestowe hys lyfe for hys friendes. Ye are my friendes, if ye do what soeuer I commaund you. Hence forth cal I not you seruaunts, for the seruaunt knoweth not what hys Lord doth. But you haue I called friendes, for all thinges that I haue heard of my Father haue I opened to you. Ye haue not chosen me, but I haue chosen you, and or∣dayned you, to go and bryng foorth fruite, and that your fruite should remayne: that what soeuer ye aske of the Father in my name, he may geue it you. ¶Saynt Iohn Baptistes day. The Epistle. Esay. xl. BE of good chere my people, O ye Prophetes com∣fort my people saith your God, comfort Ierusalem at the hart, & tell her that her trauail is at an end, that her offences is pardoned, that she hath receiued of the Lords hand sufficient correction for al her syns. A voice cried in wildernes, prepare the way of ye Lord in the wildernes, make straight the path for our God in the desert. Let all valeies be exalted, & euery moun∣taine and hyll be layde low. What so is crooked, let it bee made straight, and let the rough bee made playne fieldes. For the glory of the Lord shal appeare, and al flesh shal at once see it: for why the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it. The same voyce spake: Now cry. And the Prohet answered: what shal I cry? That all flesh is grasse, and that all the goodlynes thereof, is as the floure of the field. The grasse is wythered, the floure falleth away: Euen so is the people as grasse, when the breath of the Lord bloweth vpon them. Neuerthe¦les, whether the grasse wyther, or that the floure vade away, yet the woorde of our God endureth for euer.
Go vp vnto the hie hyll (O Sion) thou that bryngest good tidinges, lyft vp thy voyce with power, O thou Preacher Ierusalem. Lyft it vp wythout feare, & say vnto the cities of Iuda: Behold your God, behold the Lord God shall come with power, and beare rule with his arme. Behold he bringeth his treasure with him, and his workes go before him. He shal feede his flocke lyke an Heardman. Hee shall gather the Lambes to∣gether with his arme, and cary them in hys bosome, and shall kindly intreate those that beare young. ¶The Gospel. Luke. i. ELizabethes time came that she shuld be deliuered, & she brought forth a sonne. And her neyghbours and her Cosens heard how the Lord had shewed great mercy vpon, and reioyced with her. And it fortu∣ned that in the eyght day they came to circumcise the childe, and called his name Zachary, after the name of his father. And his mother answered and sayd: not so, but his name shall be called Iohn. And they sayde vnto her: There is none in thy kynred that is named with this name. And they made sygnes to hys father how he would haue him called. And he asked for wri∣ting tables, and wrote saying, his name is Iohn. And they maruayled all. And hys mouth was opened im∣mediately, and his toung also, & he spake and praysed God. And feare came on all them that dwelt nye vnto him. And al these sayings was noised abrod through∣out all the hye country of Iewry, and they that heard them, layd them vp in their hartes, saying: what ma∣ner of child shal this be? And the hand of the Lord was with him. And his father Zacharias was fylled wyth the holy Ghost, & prophecied saying: Praysed be the
Lord God of Israell for he hath visited and redemed his people. And raised vp an horne of saluation vnto vs in the house of his seruaunt Dauid. Euen as he promi∣sed by the mouth of his holy Prophetes, which were since the world began: that we should be saued frō our enemies & frō the hand of all yt hate vs. That he would deale mercifully with our fathers, and remember his holy couenaunt, & he would performe the oth which he sware to our father Abraham for to geue vs. That we being deliuered out of the hands of our enemies might serue hym wythout feare all the dayes of our lyfe, in such holines and righteousnes, as are acceptable for him. And thou childe shalt be called the Prophet of the highest, for thou shalt go before the face of the Lord to prepare his waies. To geue knowledge of saluacion vnto his people for the remission of syns. Through the tender mercy of our God whereby the day spring from an hye hath visited vs. To geue light to them that sat in darknes, and in the shadow of death, to guide our feete into the way of peace. And the Childe grewe and waxed strong in spirit & was in wildernes till the day came, when he should shew himselfe vnto the Israelits ¶Saynt Peters day the Apostle. The Epistle. Actes. xii. AT the same time Herod the king stretched foorth his handes to vexe certain of the congregation. And he kylled Iames the Brother of Iohn with the sworde. And because he saw it pleased the Iewes, he proceded further and tooke Peter also. Then were the dayes of swete bread. And when hee had caught him, he put hym in prison also and deliuered hym to four quarternions of souldiers to bee kept, intending
after Easter to bringe him foorth to the people. And Peter was kepte in prison, but prayer was made with out ceasing, of the congregation vnto God for him. And when Herod woulde haue brought him out vnto the people, the same night slepte Peter betwene two soldiers, bound with two chaines: and the kepers before the doore, kept the prison. And behold the Aun∣gell of the Lord was there present, and a light shined in the habitation. And he smot Peter on the side, and stir∣red him vp, saying arise vp quickly. And his chaines fel from his hands. And the Aungell sayd vnto him: girde thy selfe, and bind on thy sandales. And he so did. And he sayde vnto him: cast thy garment about thee and fo∣low me. And he came out and folowed him, and wist not that it was truth which was done by the Angell, but thought hee had seene a vision. When they were past the first and second watch, they came vnto the yron gate, that leadeth vnto the city, which opened to them by the owne accord, and they went out and passed tho∣row one streete & foorthwith the Angel departed from him. And when Peter was come to himselfe he sayd: now I know of a suretye that the Lord hath sent his angel, and hath deliuered me out of the hand of Herod and from all waiting of the people of the Iewes. ¶The Gospell. Math. xv. WHen Iesus came into the coastes of the City which is called Cesarea Philippy, he asked his disciples saying: whom do men say that I the son of man am? They sayd: Some say that thou art Iohn Baptist, some Helias, some Ieremias, or one of the Prophets. He said vnto them: but whom say ye that I am? Simon Peter aunswered and sayde: Thou art
Christ the son of the liuing God. And Iesus aunswered and said vnto him. Happy art thou Simon the sonne of Ionas, for flesh and bloud hath not opened that vnto thee, but my father which is in heauen. And I say vnto thee that thou art Peter: and vpon this rocke I will builde my congregacion. And the gates of hell shall not preuaile against it. And I wil geue vnto thee the keies of the kingdome of heauen. And whatsoeuer thou bin∣dest in earth, shalbe bound in heauen, and whatsoeuer thou loosest in earth, shalbe loosed in heauen. ¶Saint Iames the Apostle. The Epistle. Actes. xi. IN those dayes came Prophetes from the City of Ierusalem vnto Antioch: and there stood vp one of them named Agabus and signified by the spirite that there should be great dearth throughout all the world, which came to passe in the Emperour Claudius dayes. Then the disciples euery man according to hys abilitye, purposed to send succour vnto the brethren which dwelt in Iewry, which thing they also did and sent it to the elders by the handes of Barnabas and Saule. At the same time Herod the kinge stretched foorth his handes to vexe ceriaine of the congregation And hee killed Iames the brother of Iohn with the sword. And because he saw it pleased the Iewes, he proceeded further and tooke Peter also. ¶The Gospell. Math. xx. THen came to him the mother of Zebedes children with her sonnes, worshipping him, and desiring a certain thing of him: and he sayd vnto her: what wilt thou? Shee sayd vnto him: Graunt that these my two Sonnes may syt, the one on thy right hand,
and the other on thy lefte, in thy kingdome. But Ie∣sus answered and sayd: yee wote not what ye aske, are ye able to drinke of the cup that I shall drinke of, and to be baptised with the baptisme that I am baptised with? They said vnto him: we are. He sayd vnto them ye shal drink in deede of my cup, & be baptised with the baptisme yt I am baptised with, but to syt on my right hand and on my left is not mine to geue, but it shall chaunce vnto them that it is prepared for of my Father And when the .x. heard this they disdayned at the two brethren. But Iesus called them vnto hym and sayd: ye know that the princes of the nacions haue domini∣on ouer them, and they that are great men exercise auc∣thority vpon them. It shall not be so among you. But whosoeuer will be great among you, let him bee your minister: and whosoeuer wyll be chiefe among you, let him be your seruaunt. Euen as the sonne of man came not to be ministred vnto, but to minister, and to geue his life a redemption for many. ¶Saynt Bartholmewes day the Apostle. The Epistle. Actes. v. BY the handes of the Apostels, were many signes and wonders shewed among the people. And they were all together with one accord in Salomons porch. And of other durst no man ioyne hym selfe to them: neuertheles the people magnified them. The numbre of them that beleued in the Lord, both of men and women, grew more and more: insomuch that they brought the sick into the streetes, and layde them on beds and couches, that at the least way the shadow of Peter when he came by might shadow some of them. There came also a multitude out of the Cytyes round
about vnto Ierusalem, bringing sicke folkes, and them which were vexed with vncleane spirites, and they were healed euery one. ¶The Gospell. Luke xxii. ANd ther was a strife among them which of them should seeme to be the greatest. And he sayd vnto them: the kinges of nations raign ouer them, and they that haue auctority vpon them, are called gracious Lords: But ye shall not so be. But he that is greatest among you shal be as the yonger, and he that is chiefe, shal be as he that doth minister. For whether is grea∣ter he that sitteth at meate, or he that serueth? Is not he yt sitteth at meate? But I am among you as he that ministreth. Ye are they which haue bidden with me in my temptaciōs. And I appoint vnto you a kingdome, as my Father hath appointed vnto me, that yee may eate and drinke at my table in my kingdome, and syt on seates iudgeing the twelue Tribes of Israell. ¶Saynt Mathewes day. The Epistle. ii. Cor. iiii. SEing that we haue such an office, euen as God hath had mercy on vs, we go not out of kind but haue cast from vs the clokes of vnhonestye, and walke not in craftines, neyther handle we the woord of God deceit∣fully, but open the truth, and report our selues to eue∣ry mans conscience in the sight of God. If our Gospell be yet hyd, it is hyd amonge them that are lost, in whom the God of thys world hath blinded the minds of them which beleue not, least the light of the Gospell of the glorye of Christ (which is the image of God) should shine vnto them. For we preach not our selues, but Christ Iesus to be the Lord, and our selues your
seruauntes for Iesus sake. For it is God that commaū¦deth the light to shine out of darknes, which hath shi∣ned in our hartes, for to geue the light of ye knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of Iesus Christ. ¶The Gospell. Math. ix. ANd as Iesus passed foorth from thence, he saw a man named Mathew, sytting at the receipt of custome, and he sayd vnto him: folow me. And he arose and folowed him. And it came to pas as Iesus sat at meate in his house: behold many Publicans also and synners that came, sat down with Iesus and his Disciples. And when the Phariseis saw it, they sayd vnto his disciples: why eateth your maister with Pub∣licans and sinners? But whē Iesus heard that, he said vnto them: They that be strong neede not the Phisi∣tion, but they that are sicke. Go ye rather and learne what that meaneth: I wyll haue mercy and not sacri∣fice: for I am not come to call the righteous, but syn∣ners to repentaunce. ¶Saynt Michael and all Angels day. The Epistle. Apo. ii. THere was a great battayle in heauen: Michael & his Aungels fought with the Dragon, and the Dragon fought with his Aungels, and preuailed not, neither was their place found any more in heauen. And the great dragon that old serpent called the De∣uyll and Sathanas was cast out, which deceiueth all the world. And he was cast into the earth, and his an∣gels were cast out also with him. And I heard a loud voyce saying: in heauen is now made saluation and strength, and the kingdome of one God, and the power of hys Christ. For the accuser of our brethren is cast
downe, which accused them before God day and night. And they ouercame him by the bloud of the Lambe, & by the woorde of their testimonye, and they loued not their lyues vnto the death. Therfore reioyce heauens, and ye that dwell in them. Wo vnto the inhabitours of the earth, and of the sea, for the Deuyll is come downe vnto you, which hath great wrath, because hee know∣eth that he hath but a short tyme. ¶The Gospell. Math. xviii. AT the same time came the Disciples vnto Iesus, saying: Who is the greatest in the kyngdome of heauē? Iesus called a child vnto him, and set him in the mydst of them, & sayd: verely I say vnto you, ex∣cept ye turne and become as children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heauen. Whosoeuer therfore hum∣bleth himselfe as this child, that same is the greatest in the kyngdome of heauen. And who so euer receyueth such a childe in my name, receueth me: but who so doth offend one of these litle ones which beleue in me, it wer better for him that a mylstone were hanged about his necke, & that he were drowned in the depth of the sea. Wo vnto the world because of offences, necessary it is that offences come. But wo vnto the man by whō the offences cōmeth. Wherfore if thy hand or thy foote hin¦der thee, cut him of, & cast it from thee. It is better for thee to enter into life halt or maimed, rather then thou shouldest (hauing two hands or two feete) be cast into euerlasting fire. And if thine eye offēd thee, pluck it out & cast it from thee: it is better for thee to enter into life with one eye, rather then (hauing two eyes) to be cast into hel fire. Take hede that ye despise not one of these litle ones: for I say vnto you yt in heauē their angels do
alwaies behold ye face of my father which is in heauen. ¶Saint Luke the Euangelist. The Epistle. ii. Timo. iiii. WAtch thou in althinges, suffer afflictions, do the woorke throughly of an Euangelist, fulfyll thine of∣fice vnto the vttermost, be sober. For I am now ready to be offered, and the tyme of my departing is at hand. I haue fought a good fight, I haue fulfilled my course I haue kept the fayth. From henceforth their is layd vp for me a crowne of righteousnes, which the Lord (that is a righteous iudge) shal geue to me at yt day, not to mee onelye, but to all them that loue hys com∣ming. Do thy diligence, that thou mayest come short∣ly vnto me: For Demas hath forsaken me, and loueth this present world and is departed vnto Thessalonica. Cresens is gone to Galacia. Titus vnto Dalmacia, onely Lucas is with me. Take Marke and bring him with thee, for he is profitable vnto me for the ministra∣tion, and Tichicus haue I sent to Ephesus. The cloke that I left at Troada with Carpus, when thou com∣mest bringe with thee, and the bookes, but specially the parchment. Alexander the Coppersmith did me much euill: the Lord reward hym according to hys deedes, of whom be thou ware also. For he hath great∣ly withstood our woords. ¶The Gospel. Luke. x. THe Lord appoynted other seuentye also, and sent them two and two before him, into euerye Citye and place, whyther hee hym selfe woulde come. Therefore he sayd vnto them, the haruest is great, but the labourers are few. Pray ye therefore the Lord of the haruest to send foorth labourers into the haruest.
Go your waies, behold I sende you foorth as Lambes among Wolues, beare no wallet, neither scrip nor shoes and salute no man by the way, into whatsoeuer house you enter, fyrst say: peace be to this house. And if the son of peace be there, your peace shall rest vpon him, if not it shal returne to you againe. And in the same house tary styll, eating and drinking such as they geue, for the labourer his worthy of his reward. ¶Simon and Iudes day Apostles. The Epistle. Iude. i. IVdas the seruaunt of Iesu Christ, the brother of Iames to them which are called and sanctifyed in God the Father, and preserued in Iesu Christ. Mer∣cy vnto you, and peace and loue be multiplied. Beloued when I gaue al diligence to write vnto you of the com∣mon saluation, it was needefull for me to wryte vnto you to exhort you that ye should continually labour in the fayth, which was once geuen vnto the Sayntes. For there are certayne vngodly men craftely crept in, of which it was written afore tyme vnto such iudge∣ment. They turne the grace of our God vnto wantones and deny God (which is the onely Lord) and our Lord Iesu Christ. My minde is therfore to put you in remē∣braunce, for asmuch as ye once know this, how that the Lord (after that he had deliuered the people out of Egipt) destroied thē which after beleued not. The An∣gels also which kept not their first state, but left their own habitaciō, he hath reserued in euerlasting chaines vnder darknes, vnto the iudgement of the great day, euen as Sodom and Gomor, & the Cities about them, which in lyke maner defiled themselues with fornicati∣on, and followed straunge flesh, are set foorth for an ex∣ample,
& suffer the payne of eternall fire: lykewise these being deceiued by dreames defyle the flesh, despyse ru∣lers, and speake euyll of them that are in aucthority. ¶The Gospell. Iohn. xv. THis I commaund you that ye loue together. If the world hate you, ye know it hated me before it hated you. If ye were of the world, the world would loue his own, how be it because ye are not of the world but I haue chosen you out of the world, ther¦fore the world hateth you. Remember the word that I sayd vnto you: the seruaunt is not greater then hys Lord. If they haue persecuted me, they wyll persecute you, if they haue kept my saying, they wyl keepe yours also. But all these things wyll they do vnto you for my names sake, because they haue not knowen him that sent me. If I had not come and spoken vnto them, they should haue had no synne: but now haue they nothing to cloke theyr synne withall. He that hateth me, hateth my Father also. If I had not done among them the woorkes which none other man did, they should haue had no synne. But now haue they both seene and hated, not onely me but also my Father. But this happeneth, that the saying might be fulfylled that is written in their law. They hated me without a cause. But when the comforter is come, whom I wyll sende vnto you from the Father, euen the spirit of truth which procee∣deth of the Father, hee shall testifie of me. And ye shall beare witnes also because ye haue beene with me from the beginning. ¶All Saintes day.
The Epistle. Apo. vii. BEholde, I Iohn saw another Angel ascend from the rising of the Sunne which had the seale of the lyuing God, and hee cryed with a loud voyce to the foure Aungels (to whom power was geuen to hurt the earth and the Sea) saying: hurt not the earth, neither the Sea, neither the trees, tyll we haue sealed the Seruauntes of our God in their foreheades. And I heard the number of them which were sealed, and there were sealed an .C. and .xliiij. thousande of all the Tribes of the children of Israel. Of the tribe of Iuda were sealed .xij.M. Of the tribe of Ruben were sealed. xij.M. Of the tribe of Gad were sealed .xij.M. Of the tribe of Asset were sealed .xij.M. Of the tribe of Nep∣talim were sealed .xij.M. Of the tribe of Manasses were sealed .xij.M. Of the tribe of Simeon were sea∣led .xij.M. Of the tribe of Leui were sealed .xij.M. Of the tribe of Isachat were sealed .xij.M. Of the tribe of Zabulon were sealed .xij.M. Of the tribe of Ioseph were sealed .xij.M. Of the tribe of Beniamin were sea∣led .xij.M. After this I behelde and lo, a great multi∣tude (which no man can number) of all nacions and people, and tounges, stoode before the seate and be∣fore the Lambe, and clothed with long white gar∣mentes, and Palmes in their handes, and cried with a loud voice, saying: saluacion be ascribed to him that sitteth vpon the seate of God, and vnto the Lambe. And all the Aungels stood in the compasse of the seate, and of the elders and the foure beastes and fell before the seate on their faces, and worshipped God saying: Amen. Blessing and glory and wisdome and thankes, and honour, and power, and mighte, be vnto our God for euermore. Amen.
¶The Gospell. Math. v. IEsus seing the people, went vp into the mountaine, and when hee was set, hys Disciples came to hym, and after that hee had opened his mouth he taught them saying: Blessed are the poore in spirit, for theirs is the kyngdome of heauen. Blessed are they that mourne, for they shall receiue comfort. Blessed are the meeke, for they shall receyue the inheritaunce of the earth. Blessed are they which hunger and thirst after ryghteousnes, for they shall bee satisfied. Blessed are the mercyfull, for they shall obtayne mercye. Blessed are the pure in hart, for they shall see God. Blessed are the peace makers, for they shall be called the chyldren of God. Blessed are they which suffer persecution for righteousnes sake, for theirs is the kyngdome of hea∣uen. Blessed are ye when men reuyle you, and perse∣cute you, and shall falsely say all maner of euyl sayinges agaynste you for my sake: Reioyce and bee glad, for great is your reward in heauen, for so persecuted they the Prophetes which were before you. FINIS. ❧Imprinted at Lon∣don by Iohn Awdely dwelling in little Britaine streete without Aldersgate.
