D967A 49520874 174117
The Spanish Ladies Love, To a pleasant new tune. WIll you here a Spanish Lady, how she woo'd an English man, Garments gay as rich as may be, deckt with Iewels had she on, Of a fair and comly countenance and grace was she. And by birth and Parentage, of high degree. As his prisoner there he kept her, in his hands her life did lie Cupids hands did tye her faster by the liking of an eye. In his courteous company, was all her joy To favour him in any thing, she was not coy. But at last there came commandment for to set all Ladies frée, With their Iewels still adorned, none to do them injury. O then said the Lady gay, full wo is me, O let me still sustain this kind Captivity. Galiant Captain take some pity on a woman in distresse, Leave me not within this City for to dye in heavinesse. Thou hast set this present day my body free, But my hear'ts in prison still remain with thée, How shouldst thou fair Lady lovo me whom thou knowst thy Countries foe Thy fair word makes me suspect thée, Serpents lie where flowers grow, All the harm I think on thee, most courteous Knigh God grant upon my life the same may fully light. Blessed be the time and season, that you came on Spanish ground, If you may our foes be termed, gentle Foes we have you found, With our City you have won our hearts each one. Then to your Country hear away, that is your own, The second Part. To the same tune. R span1 more, there  plenty, wondrous store. Spaniards  with we  find, But English men throughout the world, are counted kind, Leave me not unto a Spaniard, thou alone enjoy'd my heart I am lovely young and tender, love is likewise my desert, Still to serve thee day and night, my mind is pre, The wie of every English man, is counted blest. It would be a shame fair Lady, for to bear a woman hence English Souldiers never carry any such without offence, I will quickly change my self, if it be so, And like a page will follow thée where are thou go. I have neither gold nor silver, to maintain thee in this case, And to travel to great charges as you know in every place, My chains and jewels every one, shall be thine own. And eke a hundred pound in gold, that lies unknown. On the Seas are many dangers, many storms do there arise, Which will be to Ladies dreadful, and force tears from watry eye, Well in worth shall I endure extremity. For I could find in heart to lose my life for thée. this fancy here comes all that breeds the strs I in England have already, a sweet woman to my wife. I will not falsife my vow for gold nor gain, Nor yet for all the fairest Dames that live in Spain. O happy is that woman that enjoys so true a friend, Many happy dayes God send h of my suit Ile make an end, On my knées I pardon crae for my offence, Which love and true affection did first commence. Commend me to that gallant Lady bear to her this chain of gold, With these bracelets for a token, grieving that I was so bold, All my jewels in like sort take thou with thée, For they are fitting for thy wife but not for me. I will spend my days in prayer, love and all her Laws dee, In a Nunnery will I shrow'd me far from any company, But ere my Prayer have all end be sure of this, I pray for thée and for my love I will not misse. Thus farewell most gallant Lady. and farewell my hearts content Count not Spanish Ladies want of though to thée my mind was bent Ioy and true prosperity remain with thée, The like fall unto thy share, most fair Lay. Printed for F. Coles, T. Vere, and W. ilbertson.
