E366 99890175 181499
AN ELEGY On that Reverend and Learned Minister of the Gospel, Mr. WILLIAM JENKINS: Who Finish'd his Testimony the 19th of January, 1684/5. in the Goal of NEWGATE, where there are above Fourscore Dissenters still remaining. In a Dialogue between SENSE and FAITH. Sense. PRISON! O Dismal thing! What wilt thou still Provoke my Sorrow to Employ my Quill In Mournful Notes! Thou cruel place, forbear To drein mine Eyes, till there's not left a Tear: Bampfield and Ralphson's not enough for you To pack from hence! You must have JENKINS too! Faith. Come, leave thy Murmurs; his bright Soul has soar'd From Two Confinements, to the God h' ador'd: He staid but till his Glorious Captain call'd; Would'st have him still in Flesh and Jayl Enthrall'd? Weep for thy self, He is to Bliss arriv'd; He is not Dead, he is but Re-reviv'd. Sense. Lament I must, and will;—when such Dear Saints Expire in Prisons, I'll fling out Complaints. In spight of all your Modest words, I'll Roar As high as where his happy Soul did Soar; I will Implore a Divine NEMESIS On such as Shortned that Dear Life of his. Faith. Weep not, for though he drew his latest Breath Within those Bars and Bolts, his happy Death Brings no Dishonour to his pious Name; 'Tis as Celebrious as a Smithfield Flame. Then peevish Sense, be still; let me prevail That thou no more what Heav'n Decreed, Bewail. Sense. O! that my Head were Waters, and mine Eyes A Well of Tears to weep his Obsequies! His Dear Remembrance calls for some Arrears, Which must be paid him in a Flood of Tears. Where Love is Mutual, and of equal Force, 'Tis cutting Grief to feel a quick Divorce. Faith. Forbear, Mistaken Sense; thy fruitless Cries Bespeak Impatience; 'tis but Flesh that Dies. His Active Spirit is advanc'd, you know; He is but gone where thou must quickly go: Pale Death's the Portal that let's in to Glory, Our Writ of Ease from all things Transitory. Sense. Ah! but He's Gone!—That Soul-Dividing Word Begets more Terror then the sharpest Sword! He's gone, who almost six and forty years Preach'd to poor Sinners both with Sighs and Tears. No Frowns nor Flatt'ries could with him prevail, From following his Great Master to a Jayl. Faith. Cease Exclamations: He his work has done, With Faith and Patience his blest Race has run; Still constant in Adhering to his LORD, Who now has given him his full Reward: His Death in Prison does more loudly Preach, Then when his Voice did th' Ears of Thousands Reach. Sense. If Gasping SION must endure such Rubs, When Cedars fall, what will become of Shrubs? Or if successive blows our strength must break, How shall our Walls be guarded by the Weak? If men of Pray'r must Doubly Silenc'd be, SION will lose its best Artillery. Faith. Can SION fear, or Overthrow or Harm, When Great Jehovah's strong Out-stretched Arm Becomes its Bulwark? Can we fear a Want Of Leaders, when God's so by Covenant? Altho' our Lord doth home some Servants call, He still supplies us, and is All in All. Sense. Ah! but how often do our sins provoke The Lord in Judgment to Repeat his Stroak! Who can but shake in Storms? Can it be hop'd The Church can stand, when it is thus unprop'd? Ah! how my troubled Soul's amaz'd to think That fainting Sion, will like Peter sink! Faith. All once must Die; the Prophets have, you see, No Patent for their Immortality; When they've done that for which they hither Came, God can of Stones raise Sons for Abraham: When Peter sinks, Christ is at hand to heave him, And by his Promise, he will never leave him. Sense. Gods hand is heavy, and his Anger's sore; His Frowns are Deadly, and his Stroaks much more: Such Mortal Visitations have a Voice, To make Friends Mourn, and Enemies Rejoyce. What Temper's so well set, but will be soon (As Broken Strings make Musick) out of Tune? Faith. As Tender Parents Exercise the Rod, Not to Destroy, but to Reform; so God Is pleas'd to manage his Rebukes; he hath Full Show'rs of Love, as well as Drops of Wrath. Gracious Effects he gives of seeming Crosses, A Future Purchase by our present Losses. Sense. Mine Ey's must vent my Grief upon his Herse; And weep in Earnest, though I weep in Verse: When Jonathan was slain, a Royal Eye In Doleful Accents wept his Elegy: So must I take like Priviledge to Mourn In Ink, as well as Tears, upon his Urn. Faith. Dry up thy Tears; for whom thou mourn'st, is Blest; He's Enter'd into Everlasting Rest. Joy 'twas to him to do his Master's Will, Now of his Masters Joy he hath his fill. In Faith and Patience wait; On God attend, He'll plead thy Cause, and will thy Right defend. An ACROSTICK. Well done, Good Servant (now thy God does say) Into that Joy that never will decay, Lo thou shalt Enter; and abide for Aye! Love to thy Lord, on Earth was thy Delight; In Heav'n thou ever shalt enjoy his Sight; And now may'st say, (such Grace to thee is giv'n) My Cross on Earth, does prove my Crown in Heav'n. Jt is the Father's Will that now is done! Enjoyments here below, are quickly gone! Nne can from Death's dire stroke Exempted be; Knowledge nor Grace, could blessed Jenkins free. In Sion's Peace he plac'd his chiefest Stay, Nor could he Live, when he saw that Decay So near his Heart the Churches Welfare lay.
