L1993 99887191 181899
The Life and Death of George of OXFORD: To a pleasant New Tune, called, Poor Georgy. AS I went over London Bridge all in a misty morning, There did I see one weep and mourn, lamenting for her Georgy, His time it is past, His life it will not last, Alack and alas! there is no Remedy, Which makes the heart within me Ready to burst in three To think on the death of poor Georgy. George of Oxford is my name, and few there's but have known me, Many a mad prank have I plaid, but now they've overthrown me. My time it is past, &c. Oh! then bespake the Lady G i'le haste me in the morning, And to the Iudge i'le make my way, to save the life of Georgy. His time it is past, His life else it may cost, Alack and alas! is there no remedy? It makes the heart within me Ready to burst in three To think on the death of poor Georgy. Go Saddle me my milk-white Stéed, go Saddle me my bonny, That I may to New-Castle speed, to save the life of Georgy. His time it is past, &c, But when she came the Judge before full low her knee she bended, For Georgy's life she did implore, that she might be befriended. His time may be past, His life else it may cost, Alack and alas! is there no Remedy? It makes the heart within me Ready to burst in three To think on the death of poor Georgy. Oh rise, oh rise, fair Lady Gray, your suit cannot be granted, Content your self, as well you may, for Georgy must be hanged. His time it is past &c. She wept she waild she rung her hands and ceased not her mourning; She offer'd Gold she offer'd Lands, to save the life of Georgy. His time it is past &c. George's Confession. I Have travell'd through the Land, and met with many a man, Sir; But Knight or Lord I bid him stand he durst not make an answer. But my thread it is spun, My glass is almost run, Alack and alas! there is no remedy; Which makes my heart within me Ready to burst in three, To die like a Dog, (says poor Georgy) The Brittain bold that durst deny his money for to tender, Tho' he were stout as valiant Guy I forc'd him to surrender. But now my thread is spun, &c. But when the money I had got, and made him cry pectavi, To bear his charge and pay his shot a Mark or Noble gave I. But my thread it is spun, &c. The Ladies when they had me seen would ne'r have béen affrighted To take a dance upon the Green with Georgy they delighted. But now my thread is spun, &c. When I had ended this our wake, and fairly them bespoken, Their rings and jewells would I take to kéep them for a Token. But now my thread is spun, &c. The hue and cry for George is set, a proper handsome fellow, With Diamond-Eyes as black as jet, and Locks like Gold so yellow. His time it is past, &c. Long it was with all their art, e're they could apprehend him, But at the last his valiant heart no longer could defend him. His time it was past, &c. I ne'r stole Horse nor Mare in my life nor Cloven-foot or any, But once six of the Rings whitestéeds and I sold them to Bohemia. His time it was past, &c. Georgy he went up the hill, and after followed many, Georgy was hanged in silken string, the like was never any. His time it was past, His life will not last, Alack and alas! there is no remedy, &c. Printed for P. Brooksby in West-smithfield.
