M313 99887832 183488
The Male and Female Husband; OR, A Strange and Wonderful Relation how a Midwife living at St. Albans, being brought to Bed of an Hermophrodite, brought it up in Womans Apparel, and carryed it with her as her Deputy to be assisting at the Labours of several Women, going under the Name of Mary Iewit: And how at last a discovery of it was made by its Lying with a maid, and getting her with-Child, whom the said Hermophrodite was thereup∣on obliged to marry: With a particular account of the Trades and Imployments it was put to during its Minority. With several pleasant passages that happened. To the Tune of, What shall I do, shall I dye for Love, &c. COme listen all unto my Song, for why it is most true; The like whereof you seldom heard, or yet but rarely knew: A Midwife in St. Albans lives, whose name I shall not cite: For some Years past, she's brought to Bed of an Hermophrodite. Which she in Female habit drest, that it might not be known; And so for many Years none knew but it that Sex did own: For why as it grew up in Years, it with her oft did go To womens labours, that her skill she might  it show And let it oft with women lye, who knew not that it bore Of either Sex a signal mark, and had each thing in store: And oft with Maids it us'd to be, but long time did refrain From the kind feats of Venus sport, for fear they should complain. A Females name indeed it had, and Mary Jewit call'd, And so for many Years was thought, e're it could be inthrall'd: But at the last being lusty grown, when as the Mother went To lay a Woman, with the Maid in Bed some nights it spent. And it's Male-instruments so us'd, the wrench prov'd great with-child, When being tax'd who got the same, she blush'd, and answered mild, The feigned Female that did come with Mother-Midnight, why Because he had Male-parts as well as Female 'twixt the Thighs. And that it being lusty grown, surpriz'd her in her sleep, She nothing dreaming of the thing, it 'twixt her Legs did creep: Which on a sudden wakeing, she shrieks and Starts with fear; But all in vain, for it was fast lock'd in her Virgin-geer. And after that some other Nights they did both sport and play; The wench being familiar grown, said not the Monster nay; But in short time she's big with-child by this both-Sexed thing; For which some folks strait her before a Iustice then did bring. And there she set the Story forth, which made some women smile, To think how with a double-Sex Dame Mid-night did beguile: Whilst others blush'd to think how it Natures great Business saw: VVhich to the Female-sex alone, is common by their Law. Nor would they be at all convinc'd, until a search was made: For why the suppos'd Lass did learn, long-time a Sempsters Trade: But the good women having searcht did find each Member good: And that Rogero 'bove the Cleft, most firm and stoutly stood. When on their words the Iustice then did bid them both agree: for since the wench was got with child they both must married be, To which our Hermophrodite did give his free, consent: And changing habit for a man, he to the Church straight went. Having since learn'd the Gentle-craft though Craft he had before, And could the feats of either Sex perform and keep in store. But now to London they are come, as many does suspect: There to set up a wicked Trade, and Modesty neglect. FINIS. Printed for P. Brooksby, at the Golden-ball in West-smithfield.
