O209 99887857 183513
THE Old MISER Slighted: OR, The Young Lasses Resolution to Marry the Young Man that she Loves, and not be troubled with the Groans of Gouty Fornicator, for the Benefit of his Riches. To the Tune of I often for my Jenny strove. Licensed according to Order. MY Mother duns me e'ery day, to marry with a Miser then, Whose bloud is Cold, and locks are Grey for Age, above Threescore and Ten: He hath Coffers cramm'd with Treasure, Yet I'll not be bought or sold; A brisk young Gallant has a Talent, Which is better woth than Gold. He proffer'd me a Diamond Ring, a Watch with Ribbons, Gloves, & Fan; To House and Home he would me bring, but ah! he was an Aged Man: Therefore I could never love him, For he look'd like Winter cold, A brisk young Gallant has a Talent, Which is better worth than Gold. With all he had he'd me endue, which was both Lands and Cattel store; As likewise Pigs, Geese, Turkies too, all feeding at his own Barn Door: Yet I valu'd not his Treasure, His Arms ne'er should me enfold; A brisk young Gallant has a Talent, Which is better worth than Gold. The old Man gets me on his Knee, and will sometimes soft Kisses take, The which do's much discomfort me, to see his Aged Noddle shake, And his Hands with Palsie tremble, While he do's my Waste enfold: A brisk young Gallant has a Talent, Which is better worth than Gold. With Gout and Stone he lyes in Bed, to groan out the long tedious Night, While my true Fancy should he fed, with that which is my thief Delight: What can he a greater Torment, To be in Choice thus Controul'd? A brisk young Gallant has a Talent, Which is better worth than Gold. Pray what can be a greater Crime, than such like Matches to contrive: I will not loose my Teeming time, for ne'er a Doating Fool alive: I am Buxome, Brisk and Aiery, Therefore will not be Controul'd; A brisk young Gallant has a Talent, Which is better worth than Gold. We find the Aged Snowy Head, is often fill'd with Jealousie, Therefore with no such one I'll Wed, although I might a Lady be: The young Man that's Brisk and Aiery, I in him can Charms behold; The choicest Blessing still possessing, True Love is better worth than Gold. Printed for P. Brooksby, I. Deacon, I. Blare, I. Back.
