p3355c 47012592 174560
The Countrey peoples Felicity. OR, A brief Description of Pleasure. Shewing the ready way of sweet content, By them that ply their work with merriment, They eat, they drink, they work, and sport at pleasure They pipe and dance, when time and place give leasur, To a dainty new tune, called The Hay-makers Mask. DOwn in a Meadow the River running clear, All in the moneth of July, the prime of the year, Where many a pretty little fish, within the Brook bid play. And many a Lad, and many a Lass, abroad were making Hay. In came the Sithes-men, to mow the Meddow down, With their Bags and Bottles, and Ale that was so Brown, The labouring men with courage bold, to each other did reply, Let's work, and blow, and stifly mow the Grass cuts very dry. Then nimble Tib and Thomas with pitchfork and with Rake, Came in the merry Meddow gréen, the Hay in Cocks to make. Where each one ply'd their labor, and did no whit repine, The gentle wind blew fair and cool, the Sun did cléerly shine, Mary, Bess and Nanny in Scarlet Petticoats. Kept singing at their labors, with swéet and pleasant noats, Swéet jug, jug, jug, jug jug, jug, jug, the Nightingale did sing, Whose noble voice made all rejoyce, as they were Hay-making, Then Robin Ned, and Richard, being in a merry vain, To further the Hay-making, run nimbly over the Plain. And came into the Meddow, with courage and delight. And ply'd their businesse stoutly, whilst Phoebus shined bright, Rowland and swéet William, and John upon that day, Brought pretty Kate and Bridget, to help them make the Hay. Fair Margret, Sue and Francis, they stayd not long behind, But for to todd and turn the Hay, they were every one inclin'd. The second to the same tune NOw when those Lads and Lasses were all together that day, In that same gallant Meddow, a making of the Hay: They ply'd their work so closely. and labored so compleat, Until the pretty Maidens brows, did drop a pace with sweat. The young-men in like manner, drew forth Handkerchiefs then, To wipe the Maidens Faces, like loving hearted men. No hurt was done amongst them, but now and then a kisse, The young-men gave their swét hearts you know no harm's in this. At last when bright Phoebus, the Sun was going down, A merry disposed Piper, approached from the Town. And with his Pipe and Tabor, he did so trimly play. So that they all laid down their Tools, and left off making Hay. Then each man took his Swéet heart, their fortunes to advance, John with Nell, and Nan with Will, and Tib with Tom did dance, No rare nor braver pastime; could be under the Sun, Then from the morn to evening was in the Meddow done: Now thus much for the Countrey folks I dare be bold to say, Which in the merry Meddow, that time were making Hay, No ill act was committed, nor no ill bussnesse wrought. Would every one in London were, as pure in Déed and Thought: Some of you London Lasses, flais up and doown in jags, With Copper Lace, and painted face; silk Scarfs, and gay black Bags: In my mind are not so wholsom, so hans;ome nor so fair: As are the Countrey Damsels plain that nere such toyes did wear. L. P FINIS. London, Printed for Francis Grove on Snow-hill.
