s1521c 52615066 176171
C R HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms AT HOLYRUD-HOUSE, The tenth day of September, one thousand six hundred and sixty two. THe Lords of His Majesties Privy Council, having, in pursuance of His Majesties Royal Pleasure and Commands, by the Proclamation dated at Edinburgh the ninth day of January last by-past, Discharged all Ec∣clesiastical Meetings in Synods, Presbyteries and Church-sessions, untill they be authorized and ordered by the Archbishops and Bishops in their respective Sees. And considering, that the Lords Archbi∣shops and Bishops, have, all this Session of Parliament, been engaged to attend the service thereof, and now are to repair to their respective Sees, for exercising of the Government, and ordering the affairs of the Church, according to that Authority and Iurisdiction which is settled and established upon them by the Name, and for that effect, have resolved to hold their diocesian Assemblies in the Diocesses of St. Andrews, Glasgow, Edinburgh, Dunkell, Brechan and Dunblain, upon the second Tuesday of October next; and to hold the Assemblies in the Diocesses of Galloway, Aberdeen, Murray, Ross, Caithness, Isles, Argyl and Orknay, upon the third Tuesday of the said moneth. Therefore, the Lord Commissioner his Grace, and the Lords of His Majesties Privy Council, do think fit, by open Proclamation, to make publication hereof to all persons con∣cerned; And to command and require, that all Parsons, Vicars, Ministers, in Burgh or Land within these respective Diocesses, do repair to the said diocesian Meetings, upon the foresaid dayes and in time coming, as they shall be required to give their concurrence in their stations, for the exercise of ministerial Duties, for the Order and Peace of the Church: With certifica∣tion, That whosoever shall presume not to give their presence and dutifull attendance upon these diocesian Assemblies, and shall not concur in other Church-meetings as they shall be appointed and authorized by the respective Archbishops and Bishops, shall be holden as contemners of His Majesties Authority, and incur the censures provded in such cases. And it is hereby alwayes pro∣vided, that no Minister or Ministers, upon whitsoever cause or pretence, shall presume to keep any Ecclesiastick Meetings, who shall not submit to, and own the Ecclesiastick Government by Archbishops and Bishops; with certification, that all such Meetings shall be holden, hence∣forth, as seditious. And Ordains these presents t be printed, and published at the Mercat Crosses of the head Burghs of the Shires, that none préend ignorance. Pet. Wedderburne, Cl. Sti. Consilii. EDINBƲRGH, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, 1662.
