S1587 52528925 178977
PROCLAMATION Against Exporting of Wool and Importing of Woollen-Cloath, &c. WILLIAM by the Grace of GOD, King of Great-Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith: To  Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that Part, Conjunctly and severally, specially Constitut, Greeting; For∣as much, as by the fourtieth Act of the Parliament One thousand six hundred sixty one, Entituled ACT for Erecting of Manufactories, and relative to many former Acts of Parliament and Council; It is expresly provided, that in regard of the great prejudice to the Kingdom, by Exportation of Wool; Therefore all and every person whatsomever, Native or Stranger, are Discharged to Export out of this Kingdom any Wool, under the Declaration contained in the said Act: Certifying such as do in the con∣trary, they shall Forefault such Wool, or the just Value thereof, the one half to Us, and the other half to the Informer who shall Discover, Apprehend, and Prosecute the same before Our Exchequer: Besides, that the Persons and Estates of such Contraveeners, shall be lyable to such Punishments and Fynes for the same, as Our Exchequer shall Appoint. And further, the foresaid Act Discharges all Regraiters and Fore∣stallers of Mercats of Wool, and that no Merchant or other person whatsomever, buy and keep up Wool unto Dearth, but that they bring the same to be sold in open Mercats, under the Pains contained in the Acts of Parliament, made against Regraiters and Forestallers. Likeas, by the 12th Act of the Parliament 1681, Entituled ACT for encouraging Trade and Manufactories, all Merchants and other persons what∣somever, are striclty Prohibited and Discharged to Import into this Kingdom, any Forraign Cloaths and Stuffs made of Wool, (no ways Comprehending Flannel, Arras-Hangings, and Forraign Carpets) As also Forraign Woolen-Stockens; with Certification, that all such Forraign Cloaths, Stuffs and Woolen-Stokens, as shall be Imported contrary to the said Act, shall be Burnt and Destroyed; and the Im∣porters and Resetters thereof, Fyned in the Value of the saids Goods and the Tacksmen and Collectors of the Customs, Surveyors, Col∣lectors, Waiters or their Servants, are thereby strictly Commanded to Search for, Seize upon, Apprehend, Burn any Destroy and of the saids prohibited Woollen-Cloaths, Stuffs or Stockens that shall be Imported contrary to this Act; with Certification to them, if they failzie and suffer the saids prohibited Goods to be Imported, either by Tollerance or Connivance, they shall not only amit and lose their Places, and for ever be incapable to serve in that or any such publick Charge, but also Fyned in the Value of the saids Goods, that through their Fault or neglect shall happen to be Imported: and any Merchant or other person who shall Inform against any of the Farmers, Collectors, Survey∣ers or Waiters, for neglect of their Duty in the Premisses, and prove the same, shall have their Fynes for their Reward. Which Acts of Par∣liament being most advantageous or the Good of the Kingdom, and the Improvement of Manufactories, and at this time more especially necessary for the Employing of idle Persons, and of the poorer sort, in the Work of the said Manufactories, and for their necessar Cloathing and Subsistance. We with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, have thought fit to Revive, and do hereby Revive the same, and Ordains them to be put to strict and vigorous Execution for the Discharging of the said Export of Wool, and for Discharging the Forestaling and Regraiting the Mercats of Wool: As also for the Discharging of the Import of all Forraign Cloaths and Stuffs made of Wool, (Flannel, Arras-Hangings and Forraign Carpers only excepted) and of all Forraign Woollen-Stockens, and that from and after the Day and Date hereof, and with and under the Certifications and Penalties mentioned in the saids Acts of Parliament: which We with Advice foresaid. Do hereby Ordain to be most strictly Observed and Executed in case of Contravention. And further, for the more effectual Observance of the Premisses, We with Advice foresaid, Do hereby grant the same Encouragement to any Merchant, or other person who shall Inform against the Importers of the saids Goods hereby prohibited to be Imported, that is granted by the said Act of Parliament. to these persons, who inform against any of the saids Farmers and others Neglecters of their Duty in the Premisses, viz. That they shall have their Fynes for their Reward. Our Will is herefore, and We Charge you strictly, and Command, That incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat-Cross of Edinburgh, and remanent Mercat-Crosses of the Head Burghs of the several Shires and Stewartries of this Kingdom, and make Publication hereof. And appoints his Majesties Sollicitor to Transmit Copies here∣of, and to take Care that the same be Published at the Mercat-Crosses of the several Sea-port Towns within this Kingdom, and at the Custom-Houses, or Offices within the same. And Ordains these Presents to be Printed. Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh the twenty third Day of June, and of Our Reign the Eleventh year, 1699. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii, GILB. ELIOT Cls. Sti. Concilii. GOD Save the KING. Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to the King's most Excellent Majesty, Anno DOM. 1699
