s1712 52528945 179010
A PROCLAMATION, By the King and Queens Majesties. WILLIAM and MARY, by the Grace of GOD, King and Queen of Great-Britain, France, and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith; To Our Lovits, Macers of Our Privy Council, Mes∣sengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally, specially Constitute, Greeting: Whereas there hath been several Treasonable, and Seditious Designs and Combinations, set on foot of late, in both Our Kingdoms, by Persons enemies to the Protestant Religion, and ill affected to Our Government, who have presumed to take Commissions from the late King James, intending not only to support the Rebellion in the Highlands of this Our Antient Kingdom, as appears by Bonds, As∣sociations, and Letters, but likewise, to Form Parties, and to Creat Sedition and Commotion, in other places thereof; To which end Henry Navail Pain, Prisoner in Our Castle of Edinburgh, a Traffecking Papist, was sent into this Kingdom, and seized in Annandale, and several of his Associats and Corre∣spondents, have been by Our Warrand secured in Our Kingdom of England; and there being clear Evi∣dence of a Correspondence betwixt the said Pain and several persons in this Our Antient Kingdom, and there being many suspect and disaffected persons, lurking in, and about Our City of Edinburgh; There∣fore We, with Advice of Our Privy Council have thought fit for the Security of the Government, to cause Search be made in, and about the City of Edinburgh, for the Apprehending and Securing of several per∣sons who have never acknowledged the Government now Established, and who are known to be persons disaffected and opposite thereto; and because such persons will not be wanting to give sinisterous impressions of Our Procedure, and to insinuat in the minds of some, that there is great danger of an Insurrection, or Invasion, and in the apprehensions of others Our good Subjects, that they may be in hazard to be seized: Therefore We, with Advice of Our Privy Council, Have thought fit, to Issue forth this Proclamation, for the Information of Our good Subjects, and assure all who do live peaceably and dutifully, that they are, and shall be in perfect Security, and that We will give Our outmost Endeavour to Protect and Defend Our good Subjects, from the attempts of the Enemies of the Protestant Religion, and Our Government. Our Will is herefore, and We Charge you straitly and Command, that incontinent, these Our Letters seen, ye pass, and in Our Name and Authority, by open Proclamation, make Publication of the Premisses, at the Mercat-Cross of Edinburgh, and other places needful. Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the ninteenth Day of June. And of Our Reign, the second Year, 1690. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Goncilii. GILB. ELIOT, Cls. Sti. Concilii. GOD Save King WILLIAM and Queen MARY. Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to the King and Queens most Excellent Majesties, Anno Dom. 1690.
