T3524 53299344 180066
TVVO PETITIONS TO THE HONOƲRABLE COƲRT OF PARLIAMENT IN BEHALFE OF EPISCOPACY. ONE DELIVERED BY Sr THOMAS ASTON from the County Palatine of Chester. THE OTHER FROM THE Citties of L. and W. Printed in the yeare 1641.
A PETITION DELIVERED INTO The Lords Spirituall and Temporall, by Sir THOMAS ASTON, Baronet, from the County Palatine of CHESTER concerning EPISCOPACIE. To the High and Honorable Court of PARLIAMENT. The Nobility, Knights, Gentry, Ministers, Free-Holders, and Inhabitants of the County Palatine of Chester, whose names are subscribed in the severall Schedules here∣unto annexed. Humbly shew, THat whereas divers Petitions have lately been carried about this County, against the present forme of Church-Government, (and the hands of many persons of ordina∣ry quality solicited to the same, with pre∣tence to be presented to this Honorable
Assembly:) which we conceiving not so much to ayme at reformation as absolute innovation of Government, & such as must give a great advantage to the Adversaries of our Religion, We held it our duty to dis∣avow them all. And humbly pray, that We incurre no miscensure, if any such clamours have (without our privity) assum'd the name of the County. We, as others, are sensible of the com∣mon Grievances of the Kingdome, & have just cause to rejoyce at, and acknowledge with thankfulnesse, the pious care which is already taken for the suppressing of the growth of Popery, the better supply of able Ministers, and the removing of all Innova∣tion; and We doubt not but in your great Wisedomes, you will regulate the rigour of Ecclesiasticall Courts, to suit with the tem∣per of our lawes, and the nature of Free∣men. Yet when We consider, that Bishops were instituted in the time of the Apostles;
That they were the great lights of the Church in all the first generall Councells; That so many of them sowed the seeds of Religion in their bloods, and rescued Chri∣stianity from utter extirpation in the Pri∣mitive Heathen persecutions; That to them we owe the redemption of the purity of the Gospell We now professe from Romish corruption; That many of them for the propagation of the truth, became glorious Martyrs; That divers of them (lately and yet living with us) have been so strong as∣sertors of our Religion against its common enemy of Rome; And that their Govern∣ment hath beene so long approved, so oft established by the Common and Statute-Lawes of this Kingdome; And as yet no∣thing in their doctrine (generally taught) dissonant from the Word of God, or the Ar∣ticles ratified by Law: In this case to call their Government a perpetuall vassalage, an intollerable bondage; And (primâ facie & inauditâ alterá parte) to pray the present removall of them, or (as in some of their
Petitions) to seeke the utter dissolution and ruine of their Offices (as Antichristi∣an:) We cannot conceive to relish of justice or charity, nor can We joyne with them. But on the contrary, when We consider the tenor of such Writings, as in the name of Petitions are spread amongst the Com∣mon People; the tenents preached pub∣liquely in Pulpits, and the contents of ma∣ny printed Pamphlets, swarming amongst us; all of them dangerously exciting a dis∣obedience to the established forme of Go∣vernment, and their severall intimations of the desire of the power of the Keyes, and that their Congregations may execute Ec∣clesiasticall Censures within themselves: We cannot but expresse our just feares, that their desire is to introduce an absolute Inno∣vation of Presbyterial Government, where∣by We, who are now governed by the Ca∣non and Civill Lawes, dispensed by twen∣ty-six Ordinaries (easily responsall to Par∣liaments for any deviation from the rule of Law,) conceive We should become expo∣sed
to the meere arbitrary Government of a numerous Presbytery, who together with their ruling Elders will arise to neere forty thousand Church-Governours, and with their Adherents, must needs beare so great a sway in the Common-wealth, that if future inconvenience shall be found in that Government, We humbly offer to con∣sideration, how these shall be reducible by Parliaments, how consistent with a Monar∣chy, and how dangerously conducible to an Anarchy, which We have iust cause to pray against, as fearing the consequences would prove the utter losse of Learning and Lawes, which must necessarily produce an extermination of Nobility, Gentry, and Or∣der, if not of Religion. With what vehemency of spirit, these things are prosecuted, and how plausibly such popular infusions spread as incline to a paritie, We held it our duty to represent to this Honorable Assembly; And humbly pray, that some such present course be taken, as in your Wisedomes shall be thought fit,
to suppresse the future dispersing of such dangerous discontents amongst the Com∣mon People. We having great cause to feare, that of all the distempers that at pre∣sent threaten the wellfare of this State, there is none more worthy the mature and grave consideration of this Honorable As∣sembly, then to stop the Torrent of such Spirits before they swell beyond the bounds of Government: Then We doubt not but his Maiestie persevering in his gra∣cious inclination to heare the complaints, and relieve the grievances of his Subiects in frequent Parliaments, it will so unite the Head and the Body, so indissolubly ce∣ment the affections of his people to our Royall Soveraigne, that without any other change of Government, He can never want revenue, nor We iustice.
We have presumed to annex a Coppy of a Petition (or Libell) dispersed, and certaine positions preacht in this County, which We con∣ceive imply matter of dangerous consequence to the peace both of Church and State. All which We humbly submit to your great Iudgments, praying they may be read. And shall ever pray, &c. Subscribed to this Petition, Foure Noblemen. Knight, Baronets, Knights and Esquires, fourescore and odde. Divines, threescore and ten. Gentlemen, three hundred and odde. Freeholders and other Inhabitants, above six thousand. All of the same County. The Anti-Petition, or Answere to this, is a base Libell and a forgerie.
TO THE HONORABLE, THE Knights, Cittizens, &c. The humble Petition of the Citties of L. and W. Humbly sheweth, THAT whereas there hath of late a Petition subscribed by many (who pretend to be In∣habitants of these Citties) been delivered, received, and read in this HO∣NORABLE House, against the ancient, present, and by Law established Govern∣ment of the Church, and that not so much for the Reformation of Bishops, as for the utter subversion and extirpation of Episco∣pacy
it selfe; Wee whose names are un∣derwritten, to shew there be many, and those of the better sort of the Inhabitants of these Citties otherwise and better minded, doe humbly represent unto this Honorable House, these considerations following. I. That Episcopacy is as ancient as Christianity it selfe in this Kingdome. II. That Bishops were the chiefe in∣struments in the Reformation of this Church against Popery, and afterwards the most eminent Martyrs for the Protestant Religion, and since, the best and ablest Champions for the defence of it. III. That since the Reformation, the times have been very peaceable, happy, and glorious, notwithstanding Episcopall Go∣vernment in the Church: and therefore that this Government can be no cause of our unhappinesse. IV. We conceive that not only many Learned, but diverse other Godly persons would be much scandalled and troubled in Conscience, if the Government of Episco∣pacy,
conceived by them to be an Apostoli∣call Institution, were altered: & since there is so much care taken, that no man should be offended in the least Ceremony, we hope there will be some, that such mens Consci∣ences may not be pressed upon, in a matter of an higher nature and consequence, espe∣cially considering that this Government by Episcopacy, is not only lawfull and conve∣nient for edification, but likewise sutable and agreeable to the Civill policie and Go∣vernment of this State. V. That this Government is lawfull it appeares by the immediate, universall & constāt practise of all the Christian World, grounded upon Scripture, from the Apo∣stles time to this last Age, for above 1500 yeares together: It being utterly incredible, if not impossible, that the whole Church for so long a time, should not discover by Gods word this Government to be unlaw∣full, if it had been so. To which may be ad∣ded, that the most learned Protestants, even in those very Churches which now are not
governed by Bishops, doe not only hold the Government by Episcopacy to be lawfull, but wish that they themselves might injoy it. Againe, that the Government by Episco∣pacy is not only lawfull, but convenient for edification, & as much, or more conducing to Piety and devotion then any other, it ap∣peares, because no modest man denies, that the Primitive times were most famous for Piety, Constancy, & Perseverance in the Faith, notwithstanding more frequent and more cruell persecutions then ever have been since; and yet it is confessed, that the Church in those times was govern'd by Bishops. Lastly, That the Government of the Church by Episcopacy, is most sutable to the frame and forme of the Civill Govern∣ment here in this Kingdome, it appeares by the happy & flourishing Union of them both, for so long a time together; Whereas no man can give us an assurance, how any Church Government besides this (whereof
We have had so long an experience) will suit and agree with the Civill policie of this State. And We conceive it may be of dangerous consequence, for men of setled fortunes to hazzard their estates, by making so great an alteration, and venturing upon a new forme of Government, whereof nei∣ther We, nor our Ancestors have had any tryall, or experience; especially considering that those, who would have Episcopacy to be abolished, have not yet agreed, nor (as We are verily perswaded) ever will or can agree upon any other common forme of Government to succeed in the roome of it, as appeares by the many different and con∣trary draughts, and platformes they have made & published, according to the several humors and sects of those that made them. Whereas, seeing every great alteration in a Church or State, must needs be dangerous, it is just and reasonable that whosoever would introduce a new forme in stead of an old one, should be obliged to demonstrate and make it evidently appeare aforehand,
that the Government he would introduce, is proportionably so much better, then that he would abolish, as may recompence the losse we may sustaine, and may be worthy of the hazzard we must run, in abolishing the one, and in introducing and setling of the other. But this We are confident can ne∣ver be done, in regard of this particular. And therefore our humble and earnest request to this Honorable House is, that as well in this consideration, as all the other a∣foresaid, We may still injoy that Govern∣ment, which most probably holds its Insti∣tution from the Apostles, and most certainly its plantation with our Christian Faith it selfe in this Kingdome, where it hath ever since flourished, and continued for many Ages without any interruption or alterati∣on: whereby it plainly appeares, that as it is the most excellent Government in it selfe; so it is the most sutable, most agreeable, and every way most proportionable to the Ci∣vill constitutions and temper of this State. And therefore We pray and hope will al∣wayes
be continued, and preserved in it & by it, notwithstanding the abuses and cor∣ruptions which in so long tract of time through the errors or negligences of men may have crept into it: Which abuses and corruptions being all of them (what and how many soever they may be) but meere∣ly accidentall to Episcopacy; We conceive and hope, there may be a Reformation of of the one, without destruction of the o∣ther. Which is the humble suit of Ten thousand thousand.
