W724 99887941 183598
The Wanton Wife of Castle-Gate: Or, The Boat-mans Delight. To its own proper New Tune. FArewel both Hauk and Hound, farewel both Shaft and Bow: Farewel all merry pastimes and pleasures on a row: Farewel my best Beloved in whom I put my trust For it's neither grief nor sorrow shall harbour in my breast. When I was in my prime and in my youthful days, Much mirth and merry pastime and pleasure had always, But now my mind is charged, and alter'd very sore, Because my best beloved will fancy me no more. I lov'd her, and I prov'd her, and I call'd her my dear; But alas my beloved would not let me come near: I often would have kist her, but she always said me nay. More as ten times have I blest her since that she went away. Tinkers they are Drunkards, and Masons they are blind, And Boat-men they make Cuckolds; because they'r used kind But if you meet a bonny Lass with black and rowling eyes, You must kiss her and embrace her, you may know the reason why.
You must hug her and kiss her and strive to make her yield, For a faint-hearted Soldier did never gain the Field. So strive to lay her down there and give the thing you know And when that she receives it, she'l be loath to let you go. There lives a VVife in Castle Gate. but I'le not declare her name; She is both brisk and buxome, and fitted for the Game; She can knip it she can trip it, as she treads along the Plain; Till she meet some jolly Boat-man that will turn her back again. Her Husband is a quiet man, and an honest man is he; And for to wear the Horns sir contented he must be: He may wind them at his leisure and do the best he can, For his VVife will have her pleasure with a jolly Boat-man. At Pomfret Clock and Tower there's Gold and Silver store; I have therefore to find her, and then brave boys we'l rore. VVe'l drink Sherry and be merry, we'l have beer and ale good store, And drink to my Lass and thy Lass, and all good Lasses more. My love she is a fair one, and a bonny one is she: Most dearly do I love her, her name is Mally. Her Cheeks are like the Roses, that blossoms fresh in June, O she's like some new-strung Instru∣ment that's newly put in tune. O my Mally, my honey, O can thou fancy me, Then let us to bed haste, where we will merry be. For good Gold and Silver for thee I'le take care And for a large pairs of Horns for thy Husband to wear. You young men and Batchelors that hears this pritty Iest Be not of the Opinion this couple did profess, But be kind to your wives, and your sweet-hearts alway: And God will protect you▪ by night and by day. Printed for Alex. Milbourn, W. Onely, T. Thackeray at the Angel in Duck-lane
