4314 S91274 [ocm]71305120 183865
TWO Treatises. 1. The holy exercise of a true Fast, described out of Gods word, Written by T. C. Joel. 2.12.13. Turne you vnto me (saith the Lord) with all your heart, and with fasting, and with weeping, and with mour∣ning: And rent your heart and not your clothes; and turne vnto the Lord your God, for he it gracious, and mercifull slow to anger, and of great kindnesse, and repenteth him of the euill. 2. The substance of the Lordes Supper. Written by T. W. Imprinted at London for I. Harison, and T. Man. Anno. 1610.
THE HOLY EXERCISE OF a true Fast, descri∣bed out of Gods word. IT IS AN euident de∣claration, of a marueilous blindnesse which is in vs, to order our steppes to∣wardes the kingdome of heauen; that like children new come into the world, we know not when to eate, and when to forbeare ea∣ting, no further then wee haue our direction out of
Gods word: But it is yet more maruaile, that in so small a matter, scarse the hundred person, of those which professe the name of Christ, know either how to enter into this way, or how to turne them in it when they are entred, to any glo∣rie of GOD, or profite of them selves. For to let the Papists goe, which through a shamefull superstition in it, rather pine away their soules, then take downe their bodies: it is a shame to speake, how few there are of those which beare the name of Gospellers, that haue so much as the know∣ledge of this exercise; so farre are they from any lawfull and right practise of it. For a great number,
as a needlesse thing, reiect it altogeather; For shaking off the Popish yoke, from their owne necks, by vsing, or rather abusing their li∣bertie; they suffer their ser∣uants to remaine still vnder it. Which custome, vnlesse it be through infirmitie of body, or some other weigh∣tie cause; it can hardly es∣cape the hotte and vehe∣ment suspition, either of belly-Gods, if thinking it religious in their seruantes, they them-selues will not obserue it: or of a couetous minde, if hauing no such opinion of it, they doe notwithstanding constraine their seruantes therevnto. An other sort there bee, which being afraide of the reproche of Belly-gods,
and thinking it fitting to the Christian profession, to keepe the flesh in some bri∣dle; allow (in deede) of the exercise of Fasting; but for want of knowledge of a better, they sticke still in the mire of the Popish fast. For remedie whereof, there fol∣loweth a Treatise, whereby the true Fast being vnder∣standed; as well the pro∣phane opinion of those which reiect this exercise, as the foolish superstition of those, which content them selues with a shadow there∣of, is laid open. Fasting therfore, is an ab∣stinence commanded of the Lord, thereby to make so∣lemne professiō of our repē∣tance. Wherein, that which is sayd of the Lord com∣maunding
it, is to be consi∣dered against those, which would thrust this exercise, out of the doores of Christi∣an Churches. For the re∣pressing of which errour, let that be called to remem∣brance, which the Lord commanded by Moses:Leuit 16.29, 30, 31, & 23.27 to 33 Num. 29.7. That euery soule once a yeare should humble it selfe, in fasting before the Lord, in one of the great as∣semblies of his people. For although the ceremonie of the day be taken away by the cōming of our Sauiour Christ; yet the thing it selfe is no more taken away, thē a rest for Gods seruice is ba∣nished, because the Iewes Sa∣both is abolished. For, when as (no doubt) the con∣sideration of the Fast was,
that the wrath of GOD should not breake out a∣gainst them; or being bro∣ken out, should be caused to returne home againe: the same cause remaining, there is good reason the same ef∣fect should continue. And when it is an humbling of a man before his God; was there any degree of casting downe, necessarie for that people, which is not neces∣sarie for vs? Either ought they to haue gone downe lower into the conceite of their vnworthinesse, then we, into the conscience of our guiltinesse; Whose be∣nefites, as they are greater then theirs; so the abuse of them, should driue vs to the lowest humiliation that can be; so it be lawfull & war∣rantable
by the word of God. But if this holy exercise of Fasting, doe not clearely enough appeare, to be no fading or shadowing cere∣monie, by this set and ordi∣narie Fast, because the like doth not agree with the time of the Gospell: yet by other moueable and vncer∣taine Fastes, which were holden vpon occasion, the same may bee more strongly strengthened. For where we see the like occa∣sion of fast, that was then; there we may be assured of the same commaundement to fast, that was giuen them: commaundement I say, least any man thinking it to be a will worship, taken vp at
the pleasure of men, might thinke he had as good (or better) right to lay it downe, then they had, to take it vp. For proofe whereof, that one place of the Prophet Ioel shall suffice;Ioel. 2.22. which, vpon occasion of a great dearth in the Land, com∣maundeth in the Lords be∣halfe, to sanctifie a Fast. By which one commaunde∣ment, it is euident, that o∣ther Fastes, which were kept, either by the Chur∣ches publiquely, or by some of the faythfull pri∣uatly; were done in obedi∣ence, and not at the randon of mans inuention. If this be not sufficient, to subdue our sturdie affections, to this so holy an exercise; yet at the least, let them stoupe
vnder so manifest, both doctrine & examples here∣of, by the Churches of God vnderneath the Gospell. For when as our Sauiour Christ, being charged by the Pharises and Iohns Dis∣ciples,Luke. 5.33. that his Disciples fa∣sted not; so answered, that he did not onely not con∣demne it, but highly also commend it; so it were done seasonably: It is plaine, that the libertie which the Gos∣pell bringeth, hath not re∣moued the auncient bound of a Christian Fast. And if we looke into the practise, whereby the way chalked out by his doctrine, is tro∣den and beaten plaine vnto vs by examples; it will soone be seene, how great∣ly they deceiue them selues,
which vnder the colour of greater perfection attained vnder the Gospell, cast a∣way the assistance, that the Lord offereth by this exer∣cise. For if we enquire of the Churches & Apostles fast∣ing, then was it most often, when they were fullest of the graces of God: that is, after the solemne sending of the holy Ghost. If wee thinke then, that this exercise of fast, be too ceremonious, because it was tied to a certaine day: the commaundement to hold it without any such restraint, vnto a certaine time, ought to correct that thought of ours. If we stand in feare, that it should be too Iewish; the doctrine of the Gospell is ready to pull vs out of
that feare. If presumption of greater graces, then those which should neede such a supplie, doe bring this Fast out of conceit with vs: the practise of it by the holy Apostles, at the highest toppe of their perfection in this world, will easily set vp the credite thereof againe. But if Fastes, neither stan∣ding nor sitting, neither vn∣der the Law, nor vnder the Gospell, neither of the wea∣ker, nor of the stronger, can draw vs into loue, and (in loue) into practise thereof; it must needs be confessed, that there is a maruellous poison of rebellion in our natures, which all this tri∣acle of the Lords high au∣thoritie, and of such autho∣rized examples of the chil∣dren
of God, will not cast foorth. Howbeit, the Lord leaueth vs not here, but vn∣to his Lordly authoritie, of commaunding this exercise of Fast, hath added fatherly promises, to allure vs vnto the same: as towardes the end of this Treatise, shall plainely appeare. This exercise therfore of Fasting, being both of such authoritie, and of so great weight to pull wrath vpon vs, if it be neglected; let vs now see in what things (es∣pecially) it doth consist. And they are in number two. The former is of the outward, and (as the Apo∣stle calleth it,1. Tim. 4.8.) of the bodily exercise: the other is of the inward vertues, helped for∣ward by the bodily exerci∣ses.
For the outward cere∣monie, it is an abstinence for a time, from the com∣modities and pleasures of this life, thereby to make vs the apter to the inward ver∣tue. And this outward ab∣stinence is therefore com∣maunded, that wee should both feele, and in feeling, professe that we are vnwor∣thy either of life, or of any thing that belongeth to the vpholding thereof. And al∣beit, it may appeare but a childish thing to carnall men, and a thing vnworthy the wisedom of the Gospel, to place any thing in this bodily exercise, seeing that the Lord is a Spirit, & will be worshipped in spirit & trueth; and seeing that they being of their owne nature,
neither good nor euill, can not make vs either better or worse: yet if wee consi∣der that it is the Lordes or∣dinance, who hath so com∣maunded it, we can not be but most assured, that the Lord who hath so institu∣ted it, will giue it a blessing, and cause it to prosper, to that end whervnto he hath ordeined it; if wee vnder∣take it in his feare, and in a conscience of obeying the Lordes commaundement. Those which came either to runne,1. Cor. 9.25. or to wrastle for the best Game, were wont to abstaine frō such things as might hinder their exer∣cise, or make them lesse able to performe thē with praise: And whatsoeuer, either pith in their armes, or swiftnesse
in their legges, they had o∣therwise; yet as they neg∣lected not that abstinence, so they found that it greatly profited them, to the better breathing and other inhab∣ling of them, to their exer∣cises. And shall we thinke, that the dyet which the Lord him selfe hath ap∣poynted, to the fitting of vs towardes the spirituall wrastling with our fleshly minde, shall not haue a sin∣gular fruite? And if there were no other fruite of this Abstinence, but that the enimies mouth should thus be stopped, which charge the Gospell, to set open a schoole to all licentiousnes of eating, and to giue (as it were) a sauce to prouoke mens appetites therevnto,
which are otherwise too sharpe set of them selues: it should be no small effect of our Abstinence. In deed the Papistes charge vpon vs, is heere the same and no other,Luke. 5 33. then the Pharises, a∣gainst the Disciples of our Sauiour Christ: But why should not we, if we desire that the Gospell should be well spoken of, take away the occasion of such spea∣ches? But let vs see wherein this Abstinence doth consist; where first of all commeth to be considered, the Absti∣nence from Meates and Drinkes; whereof (as the principall of the outward Obseruations) the whole exercise tooke the name.2. Sam. 12.16.17. Ezr. 10.6. Leui 23.32. Iudg. 20.26 And the word it selfe with
the practise, declare, that it is not onely a sober vse of Meates, which ought to be continuall all the life long, or a more sparing diet then at other times: but an vt∣ter Abstinence from eue∣ning to euening, from all kind of meates & drinkes. Whereby it appeareth, that the Popish Fast is nothing lesse, then the Fast which the Scripture teacheth: for they breake the necke of this Abstinence both by fulnesse and by delicacie. By fulnesse, in that it is law∣full (as other dayes) at Din∣ner, to fill them selues with anything, flesh only excep∣ted: at euening & morning, to fill thē selues with Bread and Drinke. By delicacie for that, where men on that
day, should content them∣selues with common and course meats, sufficient one∣ly for preseruatiō of health: the Papistes in their absti∣nence, did either not so much as aime at this marke, or else they shotte grossely wide. For in permitting the vse of all thinges at their Dinner, besides Flesh; it is euident, that they left grea∣ter dainties, & greater stir∣rers of fleshly lustes, then they did cut off. And be∣sides, the dainties in meates; Wine, (then which there is nothing more prouo∣king) was as vsuall that day, as of others. And at euening, when they would giue the clearest testimonie of their Abstinence, and when they did light their
candles (as it were to shew their abstinence by; the greatest part of those that were both able and might finde in their heartes, to be∣stow it of them selues, had their Tables furnished with Spice-bread, with Fruites of this side and beyonde the Seas, with Marmelet and Sucket, and such like: then which dealing, what could be more childish? to deny the tasting onely of one morsell of Flesh, and to per∣mit a fulnesse of bread: to forbid the courser Meates and Table, which might haue bin furnished for two pence, and to draw in the delicatest Meates, which could not be prouided for twentie shillinges: to re∣straine the vse of thinges
bredde at home, and to leaue the vse free, of thinges fetched out of Barbarie: finally to condemne the eating of a peece of smoa∣kie and reastie Bakon, and to iustifie the banqueting and iunqueting Dishes, which are before mentio∣ned. That I speake nothing of some of the poorer sort, which vpon the Thursday at night, and Fryday at din∣ner, would fill their bellies the fuller, that they might passe ouer their abstinence, with lesse feeling the want of their accustomed diet. All which thinges, as wee condmne in the Papistes; so we must carefully take heed that they be not found in vs:Rom. 2.1. vnlesse we haue forgot, that in iudging them, wee
condemne our selues, when as we doe the same thinges, which we finde fault woor∣thy in them. An other of these corpo∣rall exercises is watching, or a cutting short of our ordinarie sleepe: which we may apply to the fur∣therance of this exercise. For beside that this Absti∣nence, is a remouing of or∣dinarie pleasures and com∣modities; it appeareth, that some thing also should be pared from it. For beside that, it is meete that there should be a certaine con∣formitie and sutablenesse of our whole behauiour, all the time of the Fast. The Prophet Ioel exhorting the Priestes to this holy exer∣cise of Fast,Ioel. 1.13. biddeth them
that they should continue in Sackcloth in the night time, extending this exer∣cise (at the least) to some part of the night. When notwithstanding it is to be noted, that as wel in the for∣mer abstinence from meate as in this withdrawing of some part of sleepe; that nei∣ther is so streightly requi∣red of the Lord, but that those whose either disease or other infirmitie will not beare this abstinence, with∣out hazard of their health may vse so much libertie, as shall serue for the preserua∣tion of their health: so they take heed they vse not this gentle dealing of the Lord, as a cloake to hide the lustes of their flesh withall▪ A third kind of abstinence
is in the apparel, that albeit they put not on Sackcloth and Ashes, as the holy Fa∣thers did in times past; yet that they content thē selues with a common kind of at∣tire, auoyding all such cost∣linesse & curiositie, where∣by in tricking & trimming vp them selues,, the flesh may take occasion of being proud. Thus the Lord, whē he would haue the children of Israel to humble them selues before him, spake to Moses, saying;Exod. 33.5. Speake vnto the children of Israel, that for the present time, they lay aside their Iewels and Ornamentes, that I may know what I shall doe with them. And thus farre hath it been spoken of the out∣ward Exercises, which are
generall, and to be done of al, which make this solemne profession of repentaunce. There is one yet which is more speciall, belonging vnto married persons alone, which is, that they for the time,1. Cor. 7.5. should with consent abstaine from the mutuall felowship one of an other; which is so straitly requi∣red,Ioel. 2.16. that euen the Bride∣grome & the Bride, (which of all other, ought to haue the greatest priuiledge in that poynt) are bidden at such times, to come out of their chambers. Rom. 14.17.But for as much, as the kingdome of heauen stan∣deth not in these thinges; and the Lord being a Spi∣rit, will be worshipped in spirite and trueth: either
these exercises must lead vs to some farther thing, or else the same accusation will lie against vs, where∣with the Prophet charged the Israelites, who conten∣ting them selues with the outward ceremonie of ab∣stinence,Esay. 58.3. were sent home as emptie as they came. And indeed, vnlesse we bring more with vs, then this our abstinencie, our Fastes may be matched with the Beasts Fast of Niniuie;Ionas. 3.7. for they al∣so both eate nothing, and were couered with Sack∣cloth: yea the Beastes Fast, may be so much better then ours, as there be some kinds of Beastes, that can longer endure without meate and sleepe then we. Where the Papistes fast, which was she∣wed
before to be childish, may heere be prooued to be beastly and brutish: For if they did onely abstaine from Meate, they iudged them selues to haue holden a good Fast vnto the Lord. There follow the inwarde vertues helped forward by the bodily exercise; which in the numberEzdra. 6.21. two. The one is the humbling and casting downe of our selues before the high Maiestie of God, with sorrow for our sinnes: The other, is the as∣suraunce that we haue, that with forgiuenesse of them, we shall obtaine the thing that we stande in need of, and make suite for. Here therefore, first com∣meth to be considered, our hūbling & casting downe,
which is a vile esteeming of our selues, answering to the outward exercise. For ther∣fore doe we abstaine for a time, that we might there∣by haue a quicker feeling of our owne vnworthines. Therefore we bring downe the body, that the minde may be likewise brought downe. Therefore we cru∣cifie the flesh, that the de∣serued death of the spirite, may be the better knowen. Therfore we abstaine from our pleasures and commo∣dities,Mark. 2.20. Luk. 5.35. Math. 9.15. that through consci∣ence of sinne, and feeling of the wrath of God, either present, or to come, for the same, we might draw our selues to a greater sorrow. In which respect, the exer∣cise which the other Euan∣gelistes
call Fasting, Saint Mathew calleth Mourning. Herevpon it commeth,Ioel. 2 17. 1. Sam. 7.6. that weeping, which is a wit∣nesse of our sorrow, is an∣nexed vnto the Fast; which the children of God haue done so plentifully in this exercise,2. Sam. 7.6. that they haue bin sayd, to haue drawne whole Buckets of Water; which the deapth of the sorrow for their sinnes, and the an∣ger of God against them hath ministred. And as these outward exercises are com∣maunded, to draw vs to a feeling of our vnworthines; so in the feeling thereof, by them wee make a solemne confession of the same. For the children of God in time past, by their abstinence from meate & drinke, con∣fessed
them selues vnwor∣thy so much as of a crumme of bread, or drop of water: by putting on Sackcloth, vnworthy of the worst rag to couer their shame with. So that if common honestie and health would haue suf∣fered, they wold haue strip∣ped them selues starke na∣ked. The same is to be vn∣derstanded of the benefite of Sleepe, and company of Mariage; as also of all other the commodities of this life: whereof they did not one∣ly confesse them selues vn∣worthy, but in that they put Dust and Ashes vp∣on their heades, they gaue to vnderstande, that they were vnworthie of the life it selfe, and that they deserued to bee as farre
vnderneath the ground, as they were aboue it: yea if there had been any thing, apter to haue set forth their euerlasting condemnation in Hell, of that also would they haue borne the marke, thereby to declare their guilt & desert of the same. So that hereby they do ius∣tifie the Lord, in that ven∣geance against thē: where∣of by this humbling of thē selues, they seeke redresse. If then we keepe a holy Fast vnto the Lord, wee must thereby be humbled in our selues before the Lord: but if vpō confidence of our fast∣ing,Luk. 5.33. Luk. 18.11. wee waxe bolder to sinne, in a perswasion that through obedience giuen vnto him, in this one poynt, we may be bolder to be dis∣obedient
in others: or if the vse hereof do make vs swell against our brethren, and after the example of the Pharisees, despise thē which doe not Fast, as wee doe: then is the Fast, appoynted of the Lord for our medi∣cine, become our bane and poyson. And therefore here now, we giue a new charge vp∣on the Popish Fast, a great deale more hotte then the former: For seeing that they with the proude Pharisee, boast of the merite of their fastes, setting these fastes (as other workes) in the place of the Blood of Christ. It is manifest, that their Fastes are so farre from humbling them, that through the opi∣nion of them, they rise vp
against the Lord, and doe their best to set them selues, euen in the throne of God: so that vnto the childish∣nesse and brutishnesse of their Fast abouementioned, heere they haue added an horrible and blasphemous sacriledge. To the compas∣sing of this true humbling of our sinnes, is annexed ne∣cessarily, an information and meditation of the filthi∣nesse of our sinnes, and of the iust vengeance of the Lord against them, declared in the threatninges of the Law, and execution of the iudgements of God against the wicked; and namely a∣gainst our Sauiour Christ, who putting vpon himselfe our wickednesse, suffered Hell paines for it: and spe∣cially
an information and meditation of those, both sinnes and punishmentes, which the present time and persons doe giue occasion of. And thus farre touching the first part of the inwarde vertues in Fasting, standing in the casting downe of our selues before the Lord. There followeth the o∣ther part, which is a profes∣sion of our Fayth, that wee shall be lifted vp as high, through the grace of the Lord our God in Iesus Christ, as the conscience of our sinnes doth cast vs downe: and that wee shall obtaine the remoouing of the euilles tending to our destruction, (through the woorthinesse of our Saui∣our Christ,) which either
presently presse vs, or hang ouer our heads, through our owne vnworthinesse. For as true repentance, casting vs downe with one hand, both in sorrowe for our sinnes, & confession of the same, leaueth vs not in our downfal, but through faith, reacheth vs the other hand, to lift vs vp againe: so this solemne profession of our repentance, carying vs first to the valley of trouble, af∣terward bringeth vs backe againe, to the gate of hope. In which respect, wee al∣wayes finde in the holy Scriptures,Ezra. 9.5. Nehe. 1.4. Dan. 9 3. Iudg. 20.26. Luk. 5.33. 1. Cor. 7.7. that Fasting is ioyned with praier;2. Chron. 20.6. Iames. 1.6. Iohn. 16.23 which can neuer be truly made, without hope of obtaining the grace, that is praied for. But for as much as prayer is
a dayly and ordinarie exer∣cise of Gods children; it is manifest,Ionas. 3.8. Esay. 58.4. that by the pray∣er which is coupled with Fasting, there is vnderstan∣ded a speciall or peerelesse kinde of Prayer, both in zeale and strength of Pray∣er, as also in continuance of the same. Whereby appea∣reth, that here is an other vse of the outwarde absti∣nence, that it might be as it were a wing, wherewith the Prayer, that otherwise through earthly affections, creepeth vpon the ground, might the easier flee vp in∣to heauen: and that it might be a Grindestone, to make a poynt of it, that it may pierce; and to set an edge, that it may cut, both the vi∣sible and inuisible enimies,
which wee pray against. And therefore the outward abstinence that pulleth downe the body, helpeth to lift vp the minde; and cruci∣fying the flesh, it quickneth the spirite, and maketh it more liuely to this exercise. Where yet againe the Popish Fast is founde insufficient, which vpon the dayes of their Fastes, had no extra∣ordinarie exercises of pray∣er; more then other dayes which were not fasted. To the better performance al∣so of this part, is annexed an information and medita∣tion of the gracious promi∣ses of God, especially such as may serue for reliefe of the present occasions. Wherein the better to correct our dulnesse & hea∣uinesse
to this so holy an exercise; let vs remember, that it is to obtaine some speciall grace at the hand of the Lord. Whereby it is giuen vs to vnderstand, that vpon due holding of this Fast vnto the Lord, there be excellent promises, and a most singular rewarde.Ioel. 2.13. & 19.20. Whereof the place of Ioel, as it spake before, for the commaundement of all the Fastes, which the people of God vsed; so will it vnder∣take for the promises, which the Lord hath made, to all those which submit thē sel∣ues to the obedience there∣of. The truth of which pro∣mises is so manifest in the Scriptures; as the Sunne (at noone dayes) can be no clearer. For let all the
Fastes of the holy Chur∣ches, and of godly men layd out in Scripture, both of the old and new Testament, beIudg 20.23. Ezra. 19.6. Hest. 4.16. 2. Chron. 20.3. turned ouer; and it shall be seene, that the ende of their Fast (which kept it in any measure of trueth and simplicitie) was a Feast, and the issue of their mourning, great reioycing.Dan. 9.20. Ionah. 2.10. For albeit the ordinarie Prayers of the faithfull, returne not empty vnto them againe; yet ha∣uing regarde vnto these, which are ioyned with this Exercise,Act. 12.5. Act. 13.2. they may worthi∣ly seeme to be barrē, which are otherwise fruitfull; and to be blasted, which other∣wise seeme full cared. Yea, the Fast of the wicked king Achab,1. Regū. 21.27. ioyned with no true repentaunce, nor so
much as with any true knowledge how to serue the Lord, but performed in some sort onely in keeping of the outward and bodily ceremonie, went not vnre∣warded from the Lord. For euen by the very shadow of his exercise, the executi∣on of that iudgment, which was awarded against him, touching his vtter rasing from the kingdome of Isra∣el: was deferred vntill his sonnes dayes. Now, if the comming within the sha∣dow of this exercise, doth heale some diseases: what will it doe if wee come to touch the body thereof? And if the leaues of it, haue some vertue to preserue men from the vengeance of God; how soueraigne is the
fruite, to deliuer vs from the wrath to come? And if the ordinarie obedience of the children of God, goeth not emptie, and vnrewarded from the presence of God: this extraordinarie obedi∣ence & exercise in the wor∣shippe of God, must needes receiue speciall, and extra∣ordinarie blessinges from his hand.1. Regum 20.29. When Benhadab the Syrian King, ouercome by Achab king of Israel, was out of hope of any safety; at the length, by the ad∣uice of his seruantes, he put him selfe and his company in Sackcloth,1. Reg. 20.31. to 35. with Ropes about their neckes; think∣ing by humbling them∣selues before the King, to obtaine pardon: which came to passe accordingly.
If therefore, men in hope of obtaining pardon, will humble themselues to them of whom they haue no promise, that they shall ob∣taine any thing: how much more ought wee to doe it, which haue so sure Promi∣ses of good successe? And if mercie was obtained of men, in whom there is scant a droppe of that pittie and compassion, which is sea∣full in the Lord; we may be well assured, that wee shall not misse of it at his hand. And if one enimie, can looke for it at the hand of an other; wee may with greater assuraunce, looke for it at the hande of the Lord; to whom we are al∣readie reconciled, by the blood of his Sonne.
Therefore, if the authori∣tie of the Lord should not compell vs; yet the most li∣berall and certaine promi∣ses, should allure vs to this exercise. Which if wee doe not, what remayneth, but that such as will not Fast, with the children of God, must eate and drinke of the furious wrath of God, with the wicked: they that will not weepe with the one, must howle with the other. And finally, they that will haue no part in the obedi∣ence of the commaunde∣ment giuen hereof, to both the peoples, vnder the Law and vnder the Gospel; must haue no part in the Promi∣ses made to any of them: ac∣cording as the Lord threat∣neth;Leui. 23.29. Luk. 5, 35. that who so euer shall
not afflict or humble his soule with the rest, that he will destroy them from a∣mong his people. The time of Fasting, is the time of affliction, either for want of some great benefite needfull, or through feeling of some great iudgement present, or to come. Where the Popish Fast must passe an other condemnation, which maketh no diffe∣rence or choyce of time; but appoynteth euery Fry∣day, and other set Euens yearely, whether the time be prosperous or vnpros∣perous; whether it be peace or warre, health or sicknes, dearth or plentie: Which is all one, as if the Physition should now appoynt his patient, this day twentie or
fourtie yeares hence, to take a Purgation, or to be let blood: In which case, either he must be a Prophet, ra∣ther then a Physitian, to know that he shall on that day, haue need, of it: or else he must be a Physitian of no value, ignorant, or vn∣faythfull. As therefore the Physitiā openeth no vaine, but with obseruation where the signe is; giueth no Pur∣gation, without heede ta∣king to the time of the yeare, whether it be Spring or Fall; whether it be hot or cold: so it behooueth the spirituall Physitian, to haue an eye vnto the time, when this Medicine is in season: And so much the more, heere, rather then there; as the danger is greater. For
as a new peece of Cloth ad∣ded to an olde Garment, taketh something from the olde,Luke. 5.36. & causeth the rent to be worse then before: so Fasting, vnfitly applyed to the state of those that are enioyned to keepe it, maketh them worse then they were before the Fast. Yea, that which more is,Luke. 5.37. as the new Wine put into olde vessels, doth not onely make them worse, but breake them all to peeces: So this Fast thrust vpon those, which are not, ei∣ther for the time, or for some other cause apt for it; doeth vtterly destroy them. Whereby men may perceiue, what cause wee haue to make a great con∣science of the Popish Fast,
as that which is able of it selfe (if there were no other corruptiōs amongst them) to driue a man to eternall destruction. According also to the greatnesse of the affliction,Leui. 23.27, 28. the time of the Fast is taken, by the discretion of those to whom it belongeth; at the least for a whole day. And if the wrath of the Lord be hotter, then two dayes orEster. 4.16 else three, as it appeareth by the example of the Iewes in Hesters time,Act. 9.9. and of Saint Paul. And this time (what so euer) hath the nature of a Saboth.Leuit. 23.30.31. For therein men are bound to abstaine from their bodily labours, according to the same straightnesse, & with the same exceptions, that
they are bounde to obserue the Saboth.Ioel. 2.12. Leui. 23.32. And therefore the Prophet willeth them to sanctifie a Fast. And the Lord threateneth, that who so euer shall doe any worke on that day, him shall he cut off from amongest his people. The end whereof is, that men setting them selues apart from their day∣ly occupations, might be wholly bestowed in the spirituall exercises aboue specified. Whereby that we may know, that there was neuer a Thread in the olde Cloth of the Popish Fast, which was not throughly infected with the spirituall leprosie of disobedience vnto the Lord: It is to be noted, that where they or∣dayned many, both wicked
and vnnecessarie Holy dayes, this * one (and be∣sides the Saboth, the onely Holy day appointed of the Lord) they quite rased out of their Kalender. And of the Fast in generall, thus farre. The kindes or sortes of Fastes doe follow: which are either priuate or pub∣lique. The priuate Fast is that, which is vndertaken vpon some particular calamitie, by the discretion of them a∣gainst whom the calamitie is sent. And it is either of a particular man, or house∣holde. In the former wher∣of, it is to be obserued, that for as much as the Fast is ioyned with a separation from their dayly occupati∣ons:
that neither Children, nor Scholers, nor Seruants, nor any other which be at the disposition & gouerne∣ment of others, can chuse any such day appointed for commō occupations, with∣out the consent of those that haue commaundement ouer them. Without which consent, they must be for∣ced to hold their Fastes vp∣on the Lordes day, or other dayes of rest, established in the places of their abode. For heere the Law of the Lord hath place, that if the Wife, Sonne, or Daughter,Num. 30.4. vow a Vow vnto the Lord; that the Husband or Father shall haue power to breake it. The publique Fast is that, which is vndertaken vpon
some more generall cala∣mitie of the Church, at the appoyntment of them, which (vnder Christ) haue the gouernement of the pla∣ces,Ioel. 2.15. where the fast is holden. In this Fast, because a pub∣lique assembly is cōmaun∣ded; it followeth, that the chiefe instruction of the foresayd profession of re∣pentance, is to be fetched from the publique preach∣ing of the word. Now leauing the causes of the priuate Fastes, to the examination of euery one, which can best iudge of their owne estate; let vs consider what causes there be of a generall Fast amon∣gest vs. Wherein that it may be seene, that the Trumpet of Fasting is blowen rather
by the breath of God, then by the mouth of man: let vs take a short view of the causes, of the Fastes menti∣oned in the Scriptures. The cause of the Fast, is the wrath of God against the Church: where is to be considered, that the people of God haue not onely re∣garded this wrath against them selues particularly, but against others also, of the same societie & fellow∣ship in religion that they were of, through a mutuall feeling and compassion which they haue one with an other: as in the example of the Church of Antioch,Actes. 13.2. whose Fast appeareth to haue been taken in hand, ra∣ther for the miserie of the Church of Jerusalem, then
for them selues. Now the Churches rounde about vs, being fallen into great de∣cay, partly by the spirituall miseries, as well of the he∣resies of Papistes, Arrians, Anabaptistes, the Familie of loue, &c. as also of the Schisme of Lutheranisme, dayly preuayling, partly by bodily plagues of the Pestilence, almost in all pla∣ces: of the Sworde in our neighbour countries, and of the Famine which waiteth commonly vpon the same: It is euident that thereby groweth one cause of hum∣bling our selues before our God. And when this wrath is considered, either in that which is already come, or in that which may be fea∣red shortly to come: to
whether so euer of the cau∣ses we looke, we shall finde, that we haue cause to Fast. For what spirituall euill is in any of al their Churches, which are not altogeather in ours? not one of those detestable Heresies, but are lodged amongst vs. And although the Schisme of Lutheranisme be not among vs, yet there is almost a great distraction of mindes for the Church gouerne∣ment, beside the diuersities of iudgementes in many o∣ther matters. And among bodily punishmentes, the Plague hath indifferently fedde, and yet doth feede vpon vs. The Sword hath been shaken at vs both in the North by Traytors, and in the South by disordered
wicked persons. And shold it not strike vs, that her Maiestie was of late in dan∣ger of her life by a Shotte? Which that it was not meant towardes her, ought not to abate our care for her maiestie, but rather encrease it: as that which was more neerely directed against her of the Lord, to make both her and vs, to cry for his gratious couer and protec∣tion ouer her. And if we consider the wrath that hangeth ouer our heads, the notes thereof are taken by the example of the people of God,Ezra. 9.3. and first of Ezra, who vnderstāding that the people had married strange women, fasted: where vp∣on wee haue this note of the wrath to come, that
considering how that sinne is committed openly in the land in diuers sortes, that therefore anger is at hand. Here may be handled with godly and discreete wise∣dome the Sinnes of the Land. The seconde note to know the tempest to come, is taken from the Niniuites Fast.Ionas. 3.5. Wherevpon wee ga∣ther, that for so much as we are grieuously threatened, as well by the Ministers and Seruantes of the Lord, that speake in his name vn∣to vs, as also by his late shaking of the Earth: that sharpe iudgement (with∣out repentaunce) must spee∣dily come vpon vs. The third is taken from signes of the wrath of God,
which may breake out a∣gainst vs:Hester. 4.6. as in Hester, where it was concluded at the request of Hamon, of the destruction of the whole Church; wherewith may fitly be compared the Holy League (as they say) and Decree of the late Coun∣cell of Trent, against the whole Church, and against ours particularly. An other signe, is the pre∣paration made against the Church, or an indeauour to execute malice: which draue Josaphat and other moe,2 Paral. 20. to a Fast. Here the lof∣tie countenaunces, and vn∣duetifull demeanour of the Papistes, may be conside∣red, with their rebellious attemptes in Ireland; as al∣so the Spanish Nauie, and
great preparation made a∣mongst them of the Holy league, with the troubles in Scotland, and Gun-pouder treason in England; and like accidentes, sufficient to procure the practise of this holy exercise.
A GENERAL CONFESSION OF Sinnes, to be made at the exercise of Fasting, the more particular confession being ta∣ken according to the estate of the seuerall Churches, by the good discretion of the minister, vpon the knowledge thereof. O Lord which art glo∣rious in power and holinesse, wee being but Dust and Ashes, with the casting of our selues downe, at the foote of thy high Maiestie: confesse that wee are most vile sin∣ners, conceiued & borne in sinne, & that we are by na∣ture nothing else, but a lumpe of all wickednesse, whose natural propertie is, to grow in sin, as wee grow in yeares, & to waxe strong
in wickednesse, as the pow∣ers of our mindes and bo∣dies receiue strength. There is in vs, no holesome nor sounde knowledge how to obey: there is no manner of good will or affection to please thee: finally, there dwelleth no good thing in our flesh. And although our cursed estate doth here∣in greatly appeare, yet our sinne is made out of mea∣sure sinfull, through the ex∣ceding grace which thou offerest by the Gospell of thy deare Sonne; whereby wee are so farre from pro∣fiting, that of our selues we should waxe worse and worse. For the more light of knowledge is shewed, the blinder would we remaine: the greater obedience is
taught, the frowarder and stubberner would wee be∣come, if thou by the migh∣tie working of thy holy spirite, shouldest not cause it to be fruitfull. And al∣though we haue this natu∣rall corruption in common, with the whole rotten race of Adam; yet wee con∣fesse, that in vs it hath bud∣ded, & shot foorth so much more then in others, as we haue had moe meanes to kil it, and to cause it to wither, then others haue had. Where first of all, the gra∣cious offer of the treasure of thy holy Gospell vnto vs, maketh vs guiltie many waies. For where passing by many other nations, thou hast trusted our natiō with∣all: yet with a number of
vs, hath it found as small en∣tertainment, and felt as great resistance, as amongst them, at whose Gates it neuer knocked. For a great porti∣on of the land, partly neuer yeelding them selues to the obedience therof; and part∣ly falling from it, after they had once yeelded; stande proudly as it were at the staues end with thee. The rest which make profession of their submittaunce vnto it, doe it not accordingly. For first, there be heapes of our people, which either through an yrcksomnesse of the yron-yoke of the Po∣pish Religion, or through a wicked opiniō which they nourish, of embracing any Religion set foorth; so cast aside the former Poperie, as
they stil abide in an vtter ig∣norance of the truth it selfe; in such sort,) that through want of Preaching) they are as raw in the knowledge of the true seruice of thee, as they were expert before, in the seruice of the Deuill. And where knowledge is, to any such sufficiencie as is requisite for the inheri∣tours of the kingdome of Heauen: there is it (for a great part) ioyned with such hypocrisie, as maketh them more detestable be∣fore thee, (which searchest the very Raines,) then if they had still continued in their ignoraunce. Now, for the remnant of vs, which through Grace, haue truly and faythfully beleeued, it is with so great weaknesse
of Fayth, and so small refor∣mation of Manners; that our glorious profession of the Gospell, supported and borne out with so small shew of the fruites, which the excellencie thereof doth require, maketh not onely the enimies to condemne vs, but our selues to suspect one another, whether wee belong vnto thee or no. Wherein, O Lord, wee ac∣knowledge that to be our great and horrible sinne, that being put in trust with this vnspeakable treasure of thy holy Gospell, and pre∣ferred to our neighbours, professours about vs; yet we are in thankfull obedi∣ence vnto thee, behind them all: first, in knowledge; last, in zeale: before them in the
doctrine of thy holy Gos∣pell; behinde them in the discipline of the same. The yoke of the slauerie of our bodyes, which the Popish Religion layed vpon vs, we willingly shake off: but the holy bandes of thy Law, whereby our riotous life and affections, should be brought into bondage, wee do hardly, and heauily ad∣mitte. The Gospell which brought a freer vse of our lawfull honors, pleasures & commodities, was welcome vnto vs: but the same Gos∣pell, which restraineth the vnlawfull licentiousnesse of our ambition, intemperan∣cie and couetousnesse, is not so. Finally so much of the Gospel, as doth more neere∣ly respect our saluation, we
seeme to haue some care to retaine: but so much of it as doth more directly respect thy glorie, and the profite one of an other, (those es∣pecially which are not of the same lande with vs) wee make small accompt off. And seeing the naked trea∣sure of the holy Gospell, had beene a rich reward of a most seruiceable subiecti∣on: it comming vnto vs not alone, but accompanied with so long a peace, with so great a wealth, so plenty∣ful aboundance of al things, as this Land hath neuer or seldome vsed, other Landes about vs haue long looked after: maketh our guilt a great deale more, because that in thy so great a largis towards vs, we haue been
so vngratious towards thee againe. Here therefore is an other Stayer, whereby our sinne clymeth higher: For that wee, in the commodi∣ties of this life, surmounting our auncestours of the same profession of the Gospell, in King Henrie and King Edwardes time; are, for the fruites that such a liberalitie asketh at our hands, a great deale worse then they: and going beyond (other landes in these outward blessinges, are out-run of them, euen in the very outwarde testimo∣nies and tokens of our obe∣dience towardes thee. And besides this huge heape, and (as it were) reeke, of our generall & common sinnes, we haue to confesse (at the barre of thy iudgement
seate) the particular sinnes that we haue kocked vp in our seuerall estates. For our gouernours, O Lord, for the most part, beeing more mindfull of the fulfilling of their affections, then either of thy glory, or of their good estate, which are committed vnto them, haue not helde so steadie a hande as they ought to haue done, either for the stablishing of the Lawes, by which (vnder thee) they should haue ruled vs; and we by them, should haue bin gouerned of thee; or for the thorough execu∣tion of so many, and so farre foorth as they haue been wel established. Our Iudges and other Ministers of Iu∣stice likewise, haue either ignorantly, or corruptly
declyned from righteous iudgement: or giuing sen∣tence for the trueth, they haue done it (diuers of thē) with no conscience of thy true feare, or loue of trueth; but for respect, either of vaine glorie, or of persons. The Ministers, which should haue been Lightes vnto all estates, haue for the most part, no light in them∣selues: and their estate, in whose good constitution and sound health, the rest should haue recouered their health, is of all other, the most sicke vnto death. For if the whole number be sur∣ueyed, scarce the hundred wil be found, to be in the lot of a faythfull Ministerie. For ah alas, how many are there, which occupying the
place of Ambassadours, ei: ther for want of abilitie, or for that they loue ease and sleepe, carrie no tollerable Ambassage at all: how ma∣nie which carrying the light of the Gospell in their mouthes, carry also in their handes, the filthy water of ambition & coue∣tousnesse to quench it with. And those which by thy grace, are for their might and will in some good mea∣sure iustifiable: notwith∣standing, for the most part, beare it with such infirmi∣tie, through slippes, aswell in a sound and substantiall maner of teaching, as also in an euen life answering ther∣vnto, that if thy blessing were not marueilous vpon their labours, we should not
need to feare, the quenching of this fire of the holy Gos∣pell, kindled among vs, by the enemies: as that which hauing so small attendance of blowing, would die of it selfe. Finally, the people beare so small loue vnto their Gouernours of all sortes, in loue so small reue∣rence, & in them both so lit∣tle willing obedience: that it may be not (vneasely) seene, that all the practise of the Church and common wealth, haue conspired to prouoke thee Lord against them. These our great and ouergrowen sinnes, albeit they are gotten aboue our heades, yet rest they not heere. For where thou hast by thy holy Seruantes, the Ministers of thy blessed
worde, sharpely chidden with vs, and in a seuere de∣nouncing of thy iudgments due vnto them, fearefully threatened vs for them: yet haue we not trembled at thy voyce; at which the Moun∣taynes doe melte, and the Rockes doe rent asunder. A strange thing, that the Lion should roare, and the weake Lambes should not be affraide: that the Lord of Hoastes should pro∣claime Warre against vs, & we should not goe foorth and meete him, for intrea∣tie of peace. Nay, his wrath (as hath been shewed) hath been, and yet is kindled a∣mongest vs: and yet as sencelesse men, and as dead flesh we are not mooued. Wee are pricked, and wee
feele it not. Wee are woun∣ded, and wee doe not so much as aske, Who hath stricken vs? The tempest that is comming towarde vs, threateneth our vtter drowning: and yet as a drunken man, we lie sleep∣ing in the verie toppe of the Mast. Whereby it is eui∣dent against our selues, that vnto the multitude of our sinnes, wee haue added an other degree of wicked∣nesse; which is, the conti∣nuaunce in them: vnto our disobedience, we haue ioyned stubbornesse, and the Byles and Botches of our rebellion, being ougly in thy sight, doe through the putrifaction & festred∣nesse of them, cast out such stincke, as the earth which
we tread vpon, the waters which we drinke, and the ayre which we breath, are tainted and poysoned with the infection of them. Yea Lord, taught by the won∣derfull iustice of thy righ∣teous Law, we charge vpon our heads all the sinnes of our Fathers and Graund∣fathers, to the vttermost of our generations which are past: as those wherevnto wee are iuster inheritours, then vnto any Landes or Goods that they haue left vs. Whereby it falleth out against vs, that our sinnes touch the Cloudes; yea, breake into the Heauens of thy Maiesties owne re∣sidence: whose measure be∣ing alreadie (as it seemeth) filled, there remaineth no∣thing,
but that it should be turned vpon our heades. wherevpon wee make a∣gainst our selues an other confession, that we are vn∣worthy of all the benefites of this life, or of the life to come: both those which wee either haue, or yet hope to enioy, from the greatest to the smalest; from the kingdome of heauen, to one onely drop of Water. That we are worthie of all the Plagues, which either haue heretofore ceased, or been yet possessed of vs. Yea if thou shouldest ransake all the hid, and secret treasures of thy fearefull iudgmentes, which in thy Lawe thou threatnest against the brea∣kers thereof, not only to the rasing and sweeping
vs from the face of the earth, but also to the throwing of vs headlong into the bot∣tomlesse pitte of hell: yet would we therein also ac∣knowledge thy righteous iudgementes: for vnto vs belongeth shame & confu∣sion of faces, but vnto thee, glory and righteousnesse. All which both guilt of sinne, and desert of punish∣ment, notwithstanding, (O father of mercies, and God of all comfort) wee trusting vnto the Promises which thou hast made vs in Iesus Christ, are bold through him, humbly to call for the performaunce of them. And first we humbly desire thee, to forgiue vs all our sinnes. Thou hast said, that if wee confesse our sinnes, thou art
faithfull to forgiue vs them. We acknowledge the debt, cancell therefore the Obli∣gation: let not the multi∣tude of them preuaile a∣gainst vs; but where our sinne hath abounded, let thy grace more abound; and as we haue multiplyed our sinnes, so wee pray thee to multiply thy mercies: and although we haue by con∣tinuance in them, so soaked our selues, that thereby we are not onely lightly stai∣ned, but also haue gotten as it were the Scarlet and Pur∣ple die of them: yet let them all (wee pray thee,) beeing washed in the blood of thy deare Sonne, be made as white as the Snow in Sal∣mon, & as the Woolle of the Sheepe which come from
washing. And to conclude as our sinnes haue magnified thē∣selues in an infinite length, breadth, depth, and height, so let thy mercies (which passe all vnderstanding,) of all sides, and all assaies, out-reach them. There∣fore also wee most humblie desire thee, ô Lord, that the sinne being pardoned, thy wrath, which is alreadie declared, may be appeased towardes all the Churches of our profession, and es∣peciallie towardes vs, that the manifolde breaches of the Churches and Com∣mon wealthes may bee made vp, that those be∣ing receiued into the bo∣some of the Church, which belong to thy electi∣on:
the rest of the Papistes & Heretikes, may be vtterly rooted out; and that the enimies in religion, being slaine, we may to the vtter∣most thinke all one thing, in the honest and peaceable gouernement of the Com∣mon wealth. Vpon which vniting of vs in all trueth and honestie, the curses of the Plague, and barrennesse being remooued, a way may be made to thy bles∣singes; which (as the Hilles doe the Vallies) may make our land holesomely fruite∣full. And that not onely the wrath which is alreadie kindled, may be quenched, but that which hath been lately threatened, may be caused to retyre. For the graunt wherof vnto vs, we
beseech thee to remember, that how vnworthy soeuer, yet are we thy people, & the Sheepe of thy pasture, whō thou hast redeemed with thy most precious blood, watched ouer with a care∣full eye, defended with a mightie hand: despise not therfore, ô Lord, the works of thy handes. And seeing thou hast loued vs, when we hated thee; visited vs, when we desired thee not; then acknowledged vs, when we knew not thee: now that there be a number of vs, which loue thee, de∣sire thine aboade, and ac∣knowledge thee: hold on thy loue still, depart not from vs, deny vs not, ô thou God of trueth, which art the God that changest not.
And if thou wouldest or couldest forget vs, calling vpon thee: yet what should become of thy great name, which is called vpon by vs? And therefore for thy glo∣ries sake, and for thy bles∣sed names sake, which in our destruction should be rent and runne through; spare vs, spare vs, good Lord, according to the vsu∣all dealing, which thou hast euer kept with those, which in prayer haue had recourse vnto thee; and according to the old and vnchange∣able nature, of a mercifull, kind, sparing, and long suf∣fering God. Which mer∣cie wee doe not (ô Lord) desire, to the end that wee should tumble and wallow our selues in our accusto∣med
neglect, and contempt of thy holy word: but to∣geather with mercie for our sinnes, and the rewarde of them, wee most hum∣blie craue vpō the knees of our heartes; that for the time to come, (how long or how short soeuer) wee with deniall and detestati∣on of our selues, and of our wicked lustes, may offer vp vnto thee in Iesus Christ, our selues, our bodies and soules, to be seruantes at thy holy commaundement, in that reasonable seruice, which the high reason of thy holy word doth pre∣scribe: and to be weapons, or instrumentes of righte∣ousnesse and holinesse, as they haue been heretofore, of the contrarie.
All which thinges, as what∣soeuer thou knowest to be further needfull for vs, or for any of the Churches, we pray thee, as our Sauiour hath taught. &c.
A Confession of Sinnes, with Faith and Repentance. O Mercifull and hea∣uenly Father, we thy seruantes doe hum∣bly prostrate our selues before thy Maiestie, ackowledging heere in thy sight, our hainous offences committed against thy Ma∣iestie, seeing & beholding thy heauie wrath against them: We feele our selues laden (ô Lord our God) with a huge companie of horrible sinnes, wherof euen the very least, (being but conceiued in thought,) is sufficient in iudgement, to throw vs down to the euer∣lasting burning lake. Our
owne consciences (ô Lord) doe beare witnesse against vs, of our manifolde trans∣gressions of thy blessed Law, of our securitie and sencelesse blindnesse, run∣ning headlong to de∣struction, cōmitting sinne after sinne, although not notorious to the world, yet horrible before thine eye. The thoughtes of our hearts rise vp in iudgement a∣gainst vs: the vanitie of our talke before thy Maiestie, condemneth vs: the wic∣kednesse of our deeds from thy sight, reiecteth vs: all our wicked thoughtes, wordes, and deedes, with the inwarde corruption of our nature, doe altogeather as it were a whole lumpe and load of sinne, lie heauie
vpon vs, and with their in∣tollerable weight, doe euen presse vs downe to Hell. We doe daily grone vn∣der the burthen of them, in∣wardly lamēting our owne follie, so greedily running into them. In heauen, earth, or hell, we see none able to sustaine the weight of them, but euen thy dearely belo∣ued sonne Iesus Christ, who in mercie infinite, and com∣passion endles, hath sustai∣ned and ouercome that endlesse punishment due vnto them: in him there∣fore, in him most mercifull Father, and through him, wee come to thee, beeing fully assured according to thy promise, that thou wilt accept and take that full recompence, which hee
thy deare Sonne hath made for vs, as a iust ransome for all the sinnes of all those, who with a true fayth take hold on him. In him there∣fore we see thine anger to∣wardes vs appeased, thy wrath satisfied, & our debts paied. Increase in vs, (good Lord) we beseech thee, this liuely and feeling Fayth; for we feele it oftentimes in vs very weake, and troubled with many doubtes: in∣crease it in vs (ô Lord,) that we may through thy holy spirite be assured, that the punishment of our sinnes is fully in thy Sonne dischar∣ged. Make vs, ô Lord our God, to feele this same in our soules and consciences, that Iesus Christ is ours,
and all that he hath done: that we are grafted into his body, and made one with him; and therefore fellow heires with him of euerla∣sting life. Let vs not onely haue these wordes in our mouthes (good Lord) but through thy holy spirit, let vs feele the comfort of them in our heartes fully sealed, and setled in vs: that wee feeling our selues inwardly before thy iudgement seate discharged, and our consci∣ences towardes thee appea∣sed; may be swallowed vp with an vnfaigned loue to∣ward thy heauenly Maie∣stie, and towardes our brea∣thren for thy sake. Make sinne to die in vs dayly more and more, that wee may hate, detest, and vtter∣ly
abhorre all sinne & wic∣kednesse in all men, but es∣pecially in our selues: that we may strongly (through thy holy spirite) set our selues in open warre and defiance against all sinne & wickednes; that we please not our selues in our sinnes, but straightly examining sinne by the iust rule of thy holy Lawes, we may vtter∣ly from the bottome of our heartes, condemne euen the least sinne in our selues, ha∣uing our whole ioy, com∣fort, and consolation vpon those thinges which be a∣greable to thy blessed will, alwayes being afraide to doe any thing contrarie to the same: that wee may euen from the bottome of our heartes, examine and
trie our thoughtes before thy presence, that they be vpright and vnfaigned, not hypocriticall in out∣warde shew onely, and ap∣pearaunce, but that euen all corners of our heartes being opened and disclo∣sed before thee, wee may euen as though it were openly before the face of the whole World, bring them in shew, knowing that a double heart is de∣testable in thy sight: and that wee may walke al∣wayes as before thine eyes; not only before the eyes of man, being more carefull to walke circumspectly, in this respect, that we haue thee to be a viewer of our doings, a thousande-folde more then the eyes of man:
that thus we may walke as becommeth thy children, not onely in outward shew, but also in sinceritie of hart, abhorring euen the least sinne in our selues; striuing, resisting, and fighting a∣gainst sinne, not delighting our selues in sinne, nor nou∣rishing the same in our brest, but earnestly embrac∣ing, and studiously seeke∣ing after those things which be pleasant in thine eyes: that neither the feare of man, nor losse of goods, life, landes, possessions, or friends, draw vs away from thee, to doe any the least thing contrary to thy will and pleasure: neither the fauour or friendshippe of man, nor yet the flattering enticement of this world,
nor the vaine promotions of the same, doe mooue vs any whit from the true and endlesse ioy, delight, and pleasure which wee ought to haue in those thinges which be agreeable to thy will, and the constant per∣formance of the same: but that alwayes to the end of our life we may continue in thy pathes, growing and increasing from faith to fayth, from strength to strength, till at the length we shall come to thy euerlasting rest. Amen.
A Prayer for the KING. O Gratious Lord, and most mercifull Fa∣ther, wee acknow∣ledge thee the Lord of Lordes, and the King of Kinges, creating at the be∣ginning, & ruling all things euermore in Heauen and Earth, according to thy wonderfull wisedome and power: and our selues to be thy poore seruantes, the worke of thy hands, and the sheepe of thy pasture, sub∣iected to thy Maiestie, and depending vpō thy father∣ly prouidence for al things. Neuerthelesse, seeing thou in thy wisedome annoyn∣test Kinges and Queenes,
appointing them to rule ouer thy people, to sit as Lieutenants in thy seate, to minister iustice, and most of all, as Fathers and Nurses to maintaine and chearish thy Church; commanding vs not onely to obey & ho∣nour them: but moreouer to pray for them, as watching ouer vs for our good. We therefore beseech thee for thy great mercies sake, and for Iesus Christes sake, to shew thy mercy to al Kings and princes, that maintaine thy glorious Gospell: but especially we pray thee to blesse our gratious King, in all spirituall blessinges in Christ Iesus; and in all temporall blessinges, accor∣ding to thy good pleasure, that in the great measures of
thy effectuall loue, he may more and more finde great increase of vertue, & wise∣dome, & strength in Christ Iesus, to the faythfull and happy discharge of his due∣tie, that his holienesse, and ioy, and zeale of thy house, may be multiplied, and e∣uerlasting. And seeing it hath plea∣sed thee, of thy singular mercy, to giue him this spe∣ciall honour, miraculously deliuering him out of the handes of his enimies, to set a double Crowne vpon his head, and to make him the instrument to aduaunce thy glory, & Gospell amongst vs. As wee giue thee most heartie thanks for these sin∣gular benefites, so we be∣seech thee to make him and
vs euermore thankefull for it, and in thy good pleasure still to preserue him, for the continuance of these bles∣singes towardes vs, with all increase from time to time, to thy glory, the benefite of the Church, and his infi∣nite peace in Christ Iesus, the prince of peace. And furthermore, wee pray thee for him, and the estate, that such as be enimies of the Gospell, and his enimies also, for the defence thereof, may not despise the peace offered them to repen∣taunce, but that they may account thy long suffering, and his peaceable and vn∣bloudy gouernement, an occasion of saluation to their soules, and vnfeined loue to the trueth, and
their mercifull soueraigne. Otherwise if they still re∣maine disobedient to the trueth, disobedient to his Highnesse and daungerous to the State; then (O God of our Saluation) as thou hast discouered them, so discouer them still; as thou hast preuented them, so preuent them still; and let their eyes waxe weary with looking, and their heartes faint with wayting for the comming of that, which yet commeth not, neither let it come (O Lord) we be∣seech thee, but a blessed and a long raigne to him, and peace to Sion for euermore. Also (deare father) so blesse, so loue, so in thy spirite sanctifie and keepe him, that he may in the spirit of
counsell and fortitude so rule that other sister also, namely this cōmon wealth, that they may flourish to∣geather, and grow vp to∣gether as Palme trees, in beautie, and in strength, giuing ayde and helpe one to an other; that in the Church the glory of God may appeare, as the Sunne in his brightnesse, and that the lande may flow with Milke and Honie, and true peace abound therein, as in the triumphant reigne of Salomon. These garces (O Lord) are great, and we miserable sinners, vnworthie of the least of them: therefore looke not to vs, but to thy selfe; not to our iniquities, but to thy great mercies,
accepting the death & pas∣sion of thy Sonne, as a full ransome for al our offences: throwing them into the bottome of the Sea, and ma∣king his Crosse and Resur∣rection effectuall in vs to al obedience and godlinesse, as becommeth thy Saintes: that to all other thy good blessings towards our gra∣tious Soueraigne; this may be added, that he gouer∣neth blessedly, ouer a bles∣sed people, a people bles∣sed of the Lord, and belo∣ued of the Lord; & that thy graces may abounde as the warers of the Sea, in the King, and in the people; in the Church, and in the Common wealth, from day to day, till the day of our translation into thy king∣dome;
where iustice Inha∣biteth; where also we shall inhabite and reigne with thee, according to thy pro∣mise, for euer. Graunt these things (O mercifull Father) for thy deare Sonne our Lord Iesus Christ his sake: in whose name, we craue them at thy mercifull hand, praying furthermore for them, as he hath raught vs to pray. Our Father which art in hea∣uen, &c. FINIS.
The substance of the Lordes Supper. Shortly and soundly set foorth; togeather, with the principall poyntes in contro∣uersie, concerning that que∣stion, sufficiently discus∣sed, for the instructi∣on and comfort of all Christian readers. Necessarie to be read at all times, but especially, before the ad∣ministration and recei∣uing of the sayd Supper. 2. Cor. 13.5. Prooue your selues, whether yee are in the fayth: examine your selues. Know yee not your owne selues, how that Iesus Christ is in you, ex∣cept ye be reprobates? Imprinted at London for T. Man. and I. Harison, Anno. 1610.
To the right worship∣full, and my verie good friendes, sir William Peliam Knight, her Maiesties Lieuetenant of the Ordinance; and the Ladie Dorothie his wife, T.VV. wisheth in this life, all sound knowledge of Gods trueth, with an assured fayth in the trueth of his promises: and after the wearisome dayes of this pilgrimage shall be en∣ded, eternall bl ssed∣nesse in the life to come, through Christ. AMongest many reasons, (need∣lesse nowe to rehearse) in∣ducing mee, to offer this smal Treatise vnto your Worshippes; this was not the least, to weet, that thereby, I might testifie, as my vnfeigned good will
towardes you in the Lord, so the care that I haue in all holy loue, to buyld you vp in the sincere iudge∣ment of the pointes and princi∣ples of Christian religion. For, though I doubt not, but that you are in some good measure endued, with sundry good giftes and graces form God, which should be con∣tinuall spurres and prouocations vnto you, to imploy your selues to the vttermost of your powers, in the seruice of his Maiestie, and the obedience of his will: yet, in respect of the corruption of mans nature, and the stumbling blockes, which Sathan our common aduersarie ca∣steth in our way, to hinder vs, in the rase and course of godlinesse I know that all Gods children, and therefore you amongest the rest, haue neede of continuall remem∣brancers, not onely to put you in minde, but also to prouoke you, to passe the dayes of your pilgri∣mage in the reuerent feare of Gods great Maiestie: and being sound in zeale, sincere in knowledge, and carefull in practise, to finish your course in his fayth, that so at the
last, you may be made thorough Christ, partakers of eterrall salua∣tion, which is the end of our hope a d fayth, yea, the verie ende of our life in this life: and therefore good reason, that wee should im∣ploy our whole life thereto, and to the continuall vse & practise, of all the meanes that God hath or∣deined for our better attayning thereof, and namely that we should be often and earnest with him in prayer: that we should delight in, and labour to profite by the daily hearing, reading, meditating, and conference of & in his holy word; and that wee should frequent the reuerent and ordinarie vse of his Sacramentes, appoynted for the strengthening of our fayth, in the trueth of his promises, growing, euen to this narrownesse and streightnesse of onscience, that we should thinke euery day and eue∣rie hower of a day ill spent, where∣in we haue not profited somewhat towardes godlinesse and hone∣stie. True is it, that here is handled but onely one poynt of our Reli∣gion:
yet notwithstanding, I be∣seech your Worshippes, by this to gather the readie good will that is and shall bee in mee, through Gods goodnesse: further to write or speake, in this, or any other ground, whereby your knowledge may be increased, and your fayth strengthened in the trueth of Gods eternall Word and Promises: yea, I doe further request you, and in you, all those that shall read this little Discourse, to consider, not the smalnesse of the Treatie, but the waightinesse of the matter propounded in the same, which is one of the principles of our Re∣ligion, wherein wee cannot be ig∣noraunt without our great hurt: and to which wee can not vnwor∣thily repaire (a fault ouer com∣mon in these our dayes,) without iudgement and condemnation a∣gainst our owne soules: which hath made mee to annex at the ende thereof, sundry short medi∣tations, for the better direction of the ignoraunt and vnskilfull in this behalfe. In all this that I write, whatso∣euer
it bee, I deale with them (I hope) that be both charitable and wise inough to conceaue my mea∣ning; and therfore shall not neede to vse many words to perswade that, wherevnto you your selues bee in some measure, thorough Gods goodnesse, inclined, and to the perfourmaunce whereof you are bound, by the great grace and excellent calling, that the same God in mercie hath bestowed vp∣on you. This onely I wish, and will pray or, all the dayes of my life, that this my poore labour, and whatso∣euer other thing else it shall please him, by me or any other to pub∣lish, either for your good, or the good of his Saintes wheresoeuer, may be profitable, not vnto you onely for your saluation, but vnto all his elect and chosen children, that the number of his faythfull being accomplished, and the dayes of sinne vtterly cut off, wee may be gathered to those eternall and heauenly Tabernacles, which Christ our sauiour hath purchased and prepared for vs: and that wee
might be the better assured there∣of, is entred before hand there into, to take possession thereof in our name: there to raigne with him for euer, and euer. So be it. Your Worships alwayes readie and humble in Christ, T. VV. the Lords most vnworthy seruant.
To the Reader. AT the motion and request of sundrie my deare friendes in the Lord, I haue thought good to putte dovvne tvvo Prayers at the latter ende of this Treatise, not thereby min∣ding either to tie any person to the vse of them onely, for they may accor∣ding to their seuerall necessi ies con∣ceiue some other of their ovvne, or practise some better forme already set dovvne, by men of greater giftes, and feeling: nor yet, so to busie their mindes, and to occupie their heades, as that they should be imployed in these, vvhen the publike Prayers and exercises of the Church, performed by the Ministers are in hand (for be it farre frō vs, vvhen the Minister Gods mouth speaketh from the Lord to vs or vvhen he as our mouth speaketh to the Lord for vs, to haue either our heartes
or our mouthes occupied about any o∣ther thing, than the reuerent hearing and consenting vnto, of such thinges as he vttereth) but that ayding the infir∣mitie of our breathren, such as haue not the gifte to conceiue Prayer, might haue a forme to exercise them∣selues in, both before they repaire to the publike exercises of the Church, and after the celebration of those reuerent my∣steries, shall he finished.
The substaunce of the Lordes Supper, shorly and soundly set foorth, for the instruction and comfort of all Chri∣stian readers. TO cleare, yea, to voyde all the con∣trouersies that frō time to time haue crept into the Church, con∣cerning the matter of the Lordes supper, these three circumstances, in the first place are meete to be consi∣dered. 1 First, who ordeined it; to witte, Iesus Christ our Sauiour, which is an euident proofe of his eternall Deitie or Godhead, because it be∣longeth to God alone, to in∣stitute and ordeine Sacra∣mentes
in the Church. 2 Secondly, when it was instituted, to wit, before his death and suffering, by which it is plaine, that the bread in the supper, cannot be the same naturall body, that was borne of the Vir∣gin Marie, crucified on the Crosse, &c. 3 Thirdly, wherefore it was ordeined, to witt, for the strengthening of our faith in the trueth of Gods promises, and to put vs in remembrāce of Iesus Christ absent: now a remembrance of a thing it could not bee, if the thing it selfe were pre∣sent. And all these three pointes are prooued out of 1. Corinth. 11. vers. 23.24. 2 In the second place, the consideration of these three
circumstaunces following, will serue much for the clea∣ring of the question also. 1 First, which be the signes in the Sacrament, to wit, Bread and Wine, which haue that nature and force in them, not of themselues, for then all Bread and Wine should haue the like; but in respect of the Lordes insti∣tution, who alone hath po∣wer to ordeine signes or Sa∣cramentes, and to giue them that effect and propertie. 2 Secondly, what be the things signified thereby, to witt, the blessed body of Christ crucified, and his precious bloud shed, for the benefite and good of all those that by a liuely and stedfast faith, do apprehend and take hold of him and all
his merites. 3 Thirdly, the analogie, proportion and agreement, which is between the signes and the things signified, the Lord no doubt choosing such elements as might most aptly and fitly expresse the thinges signified and sealed by the same. Which like∣wise may be brought into three especiall heades or pointes. 1 First, that as verily as that Bread is broken, and the wine defused or spread abroade, because many bee partakers of it: so verily was Christ wounded for our transgressions, and bro∣ken for our iniquities, as Isaiah saith, Cap. 53.5. and his body crucified, and his blood shed vpon the crosse
for many, for the remission of sinnes. Math. 26.26.22.28. 1. Corinth. 11.24.25.26. 2 Secondly, that as Bread hath his propertie through Gods blessing giuen it, to feede and strengthen our naturall bodies in this life: so his body being repre∣sented effectually vnto vs by that bread; hath the self∣same propertie, touching our soules, to strengthen and to nourish them spiritu∣ally. And euen as the Wine comfort and make mans heart glad, as appeareth by sundry. Scriptures: so our full ioy and spirituall com∣fort is, to be found in him alone. And (to ioyne these two togeather, of which we haue spoken seuerally) this wee must know and
beleeue further, that as our diet is then full, whole, and perfect, as it were, when it consisteth of these two thinges, Bread and Wine, or Drinke: so wee might know, that the fulnesse and prefection of all spirituall nourishment is to be found in Christ alone, & no where else, whilest that hee is be∣come, as well the Drincke, as the Meate of our soule, not onely in this double signe, helping our infirmi∣tie as it were, but also tea∣ching vs to seeke the hea∣uenly refection and nou∣rishment of our soules, ful∣ly and wholly in him, and no where else. Wherevnto also he him selfe in some sort alludeth. Math. 11. vers. 28. &c. Ioh. 6, 35. Ioh. 7.
37.38. 3 Thirdly, that as the Bread is made of many Graines, and the Wine of sundry & seuerall Grapes, and yet all make but one Bread and one Wine: so all the faythfull should be instructed thereby, that though they be seuerall and distinct persons one of thē from an other, as the mem∣bers in the body are, yet they all compacted togea∣ther, make but one body; as the Apostle Paul plainely prooueth, Rom. 12.4 5. but specially, 1. Corinth. 10.16, 17. These three things then, out of all that hitherto hath been spoken, I would haue to be obserued and noted. 1 First, that though it be true, that euen by the mini∣sterie
of the Gospell, wee receiue Christ with all his benefites, of which Saint Paul speaketh Galat. 3, 1. that Christ was described in their sight, and crucified a∣mong them; yet that wee haue this, more plainely and plentifully set foorth vnto vs in the vse of the Supper, whilest that we by fayth feeding on him, that is the Bread of life, which came downe from heauen. John 6.51. are by that means become bone of his bones, and flesh of his flesh, Ephes. 5.30. and made one in him, euen as the Father and hee are one. John. 17.21.22. 2 Secondly, that this holy Sacrament, doeth not onely direct vs to the death and passion of our Sauiour
Christ, which was perfor∣med many hundred yeares agoe, as the one & the onely Sacrifice for sinne, neuer to be reiterated; because that thereby he being the onely High priest and eternall Sacrificer, hath consecrated for euer all them that are sanctified: Hebr. 9.28. Heb. 10.14. but also, yea chiefly and especially, to the gra∣cious fruites and effectes, that we receaue thereby: as the forgiuenesse of sinnes, the assured pledge of eter∣nall life, and such like: which are liuely set foorth, and preached vnto vs in the same, to the ende that wee may bee made partakers thereof. 3 Thirdly, that we must know and beleeue, that
though this Sacrament doe specially and chiefly direct vs to Christ, his death, me∣rites, obedience, and the fruites thereof: yet not∣withstanding also, it doeth instruct vs of the speciall dueties of Loue, that in Christ, and for Christ, wee as the members of that bo∣die, whereof he is the onely head, ought vnfeignedly to performe, one of vs to∣wards an other, not onely as profitable and necessarie for the partes, to whom such duties are performed, but comfortable also to our selues, whilest by that, as by a badge or cognizaunce, we are knowne to be Christes Disciples, Iohn 13.35. and haue sealed vp in our hearts, the free pardon and full for∣giuenesse
of all our sinnes, & an assured pledge of our translation out of darke∣nesse into light: see Luke. 7.47. Also 1. John 3.14. In the third place for the clearing of this controuer∣sie, we must haue a watch∣full eye to Sathans subtle∣tie, who laboureth in this poynt, as in all other points of Christian religion, by extreamities to draw vs in∣to all corruption. Now the extreamenesses that in time hertofore, haue burst foorth and are yet in many places stoutly and stiffely main∣tained, are specially three. 1 First, that of the Sacra∣mentaries, who holde and defende, that there is no∣thing in the Supper left vs, saue the bare and naked
signes of Christes death and passion. But the trueth is so farre off frō allowing this, that we feare not to affirme, that besides the signes, wee haue the thinges them selues signified, truly and effectu∣ally exhibited vnto vs; be∣cause it is most certaine that our Sauiour Christ who is the trueth it selfe and can not lye, doeth in¦deed and assuredly accom∣plish vnto vs, all the promi∣ses which he made vnto vs, and sealed vnto vs, by the vse of the signes in the Sa¦crament, making vs parta∣kers euen of his very sub∣staunce, that we might also grow vp into one life with him. And though this can not be comprehended by the eye of mans reason and
vnderstāding, yet we know that this is sensibly set foorth vnto vs, by seuerall meanes and instrumentes: some outward, as the Ele∣mentes in the Sacrament; and some inwarde, as the spirituall Grace represen∣ted thereby. For we are not Angels, but men, consisting of bodie and soule: and therefore the Lord by the vse of his Word and Sacra∣mentes, hath prouided for both partes; as the Word for our Eares; and our Eares for hearing of the same, that so Fayth might be wrought in our heartes. Rom. 10.17. and the Elementes in the Sacramentes for our taste, sight, feeling, &c. and yet our soules to be nourished not with any or all of
these outward thinges (for how can outward and cor∣ruptible things nourish in∣ward and immortall sub∣staunce?) but onely with the spirituall graces offered vn∣to vs therein; & this also to be wrought in vs (though our Sauiour be in Heauen in respect of his body; and wee heere as Pilgrimes and Strangers on the Earth) by the wonderfull & vnsearch∣able working of his holy Spirite in vs, and by the meanes of a liuely and assu∣red Fayth: both which be∣ing knit togeather, doe ea∣sily ioyne togeather things, that be as farre asunder, in respect of distaunce of place, as one ende of the earth is from the other; and as farre asunder, as heauen
and earth them selues are: or else how could we either beleeue the holy Catholike Church, and feele the com∣munion of Saintes, seeing it commonly falleth out, that the members of that holy fellowshippe, are sundered one of them from an other, in respect of great distance of place? or be assured that Christes righteousnesse is become ours, seeing he is in heauen, & wee on the earth, if by Fayth we did not take hold of the same, and apply it vnto our selues? Besides, if men should imbrace this sacramentarie opiniō, what were it, but to euert, as the trueth of Christes promises; so the certaintie and assu∣rednesse of his word, who in plaine tearmes, calleth
this holy Sacrament, His bodie? 2 The second extreami∣tie is, that of consubstantia∣tion, some affirming, that there is deliuered to the people, and they receiue to∣geather with the substance of Bread, the yery substance of Christes very naturall body; so that there is (as it were) an intermingling of both the substaunces in the action of the Supper. This opinion is iustly to be disli∣ked and reproued, not one∣ly because of the absurdi∣ties which it hath common, with the heresie of transub∣stantiation; whereof wee will speake in the next place: but also, because it is quite and cleane contrarie to common sense and rea∣son,
confounding and ium∣bling togeather, two seue∣rall and distinct substances and making the lesse; to witt, the substance of bread, to comprehende the grea∣ter, that is, Christs humaine body; yea, euen his verie Godhead: which heauen and earth is not able to containe. Besides, it doth vtterly take away an essentiall pro∣pertie of Christes body: for if Christ, in respect of his humanitie, be like vnto vs in all thinges, sinne onely excepted; and we know by the light of reason and vn∣derstanding that God hath bestowed vpon vs; yea, by verie experience, that our bodies are circumscriptible and tyed to a place: it must
needs follow, that Christ in respect of his Manhood; or Christ, as he is Man, is and must be tyed to a place, and not be in euery place; as he must be, if these mens asser∣tions be true; which is no∣thing els indeed, but vtterly to destroy Christes body: which I proue against them thus. Whosoeuer taketh a∣way the essentiall propertie of any thing, taketh away the thing it selfe: this Pro∣position is prooued by this Maxime in Logike: If the definition of a thing, which chiefly consisteth of the es∣sentiall propertie of euerie thing be taken away, then the thing defined it selfe, al∣so falleth: As for example; If a reasonable liuing crea∣ture, which is the definition
of a man, be taken away, what shall become of man, or where shall he appeare, which is the thing defined? But these men take away the essentiall propertie of a thing, to witte, of a body, which is to be circumscrip∣tible or tyed to a place; which is indeed an essenti∣all propertie of the body of man, and therefore of Christes body, as he is man. If any will denie this, it may easily be prooued, both by the definition of a body, which is a quantitie, that may be deuided, according to the threefold measuring, receiued amongst men, that is, length, breadth, & thick∣nesse; and also by the de∣scription of a place, which is defined to be a nighnesse
or touching, of the thing containing, and the thing conteined. The conclusion therefore is, that in taking away place from the body of Christ; which they doe, whilest they place it in eue∣rie place, whereas in the na∣ture thereof, it can be but in one place at one time; they doe vtterly destroy the body or humanitie of Christ; or at the least con∣found it so with the God∣head, as Eutyches did, that they make a confusion (whereas in all trueth and vprightnesse, there should remaine a distinction) of the proprieties of either na∣ture in his blessed person. But of this ynough in this place, because it is some∣what philosophicall, and
because also in the next ection, we shall haue occa∣sion to deale with the like. 3. The third extreamitie is, that of transubstantiati∣on, maintained altogether by the Romish Catholikes, which hold that the Bread and Wine, (the substance thereof vanishing away, and nothing being left but the accidentes or qualities thereof, as roundnes, white∣nesse, rednesse, moysture, &c.) are changed, and that by the power of certaine wordes, spoken by the Priest (as they cal him) ouer the Elements, they are tur∣ned into the verie naturall body and bloud of our Sa∣uiour. Concerning this point, and the branches thereof, I
will speake particularly and, first for the name Transubstantiation, I fear not to affirme, that it is ve¦rie new, and neuer heard of before the dayes of Pope Innocent the third, who was about the yeare of our Lord 1205. much lesse was it con∣firmed as an article of faith before the Councell of Con∣stance, a Citie so named in Germanie, in the dayes of Pope John the xxiii. which was about the yeare of our Lord 1415. and therefore by the Popish reason of reiect∣ing new thinges, easily ynough reiected for the noueltie thereof. 2 That there is a change I doe not deny; but this is not in respect of the nature of the thinges themselues
but in respect of the vse and ende whereunto they are applyed, because that they are by the Lordes institu∣tion separated from the common vse, yea, and from common Bread and Wine, and applyed not onely to a holy vse, but dedicated also to a holy ende, that is, to be sure seales and pled∣ges of holy things, to witt, of Christs body and bloud, and of the effectes, that by his death and passion we receiue. But that this change should be wrought by any wordes, I am so farre off frō allowing it as true, that I am verily perswaded, that it sauoureth very strongly of a Magicall incantation: and I am so much the more confirmed in this, because
the Papistes reioycing as Inchaunters and Sorcerers doe, in their odde numbers: haue added one word; that is (enim) to the wordes of institution, saying: Hoe est enim corpus meum: as may appeare in their Missall or Masse booke. 3 The grosse and palpa∣ble absurdities which fol∣low this opinion of Tran∣substantiation, are sufficient and strong inough of them selues, to make it out of cre∣dite, with al persons indued with holie wisedome and vnderstanding, & to cause them to esteeme of it, not onely as a thing false and erronious but very vngod∣ly and blasphemous also. To reckon vp all, or large∣ly to discourse vpon the
particulars, it is not my purpose, but onely to touch some shortly, yet so as the vanitie and falsehood of this great corruption may thereby easily appeare. 1 First I say, that this doth vtterly destroy the na∣ture of a Sacrament, which must euer consist of two partes; to wit, of visible ele∣ments, and inuisible graces; which can not be, if so be it that the nature and sub∣staunce of the elementes, be either chaunged, or vanish away, and the things repre∣sented by the same, come in their place; because that the one part of the Sacrament (to witt, the visible signe) is then and there wanting. 2 Secondly, I affirme, that it is iniurious to the
glorified bodie of our Sa∣uiour, not onely while it bringeth him from heauen, the place of all blessednesse, into earth, the place of all miserie & wretchednesse; but also whilest it maketh it to be rent and torne in peeces, not onely with the teeth of good men, (a mat∣ter which Nature abhor∣reth) but with the teeth of the wicked and vngodly; yea with the teeth of Mise, Dogges, and other vnrea∣sonable creatures: yea, whi∣lest it maketh it, which is immortall, in immortal glo∣rie, subiect to putrifaction, corruption, and Wormes, by reason of the long re∣seruation thereof, and at the last, to consuming in the fire, (a fact of horrible cru∣eltie,
if it were Christes flesh) because it may not o∣therwise be made away, (as they them selues confesse) if it be ouertaken with ho∣rinesse, moldinesse, or any such like. 3 Thirdly I say, that by a consequent it doth won∣derfully confound (if not vtterly destroy) the huma∣nitie of our Sauiour with his Godhead, whilest that which is proper and pecu∣liar to his eternall Deitie, to witt, to be euery where, is attributed and ascribed to his humanitie; which as hath been before shewed, and shall be more plainely prooued hereafter, is, and must of necessitie, since his ascension, be circumscrip∣tible and tied to a place.
For otherwise, if the glori∣fication of Christes bodie, haue taken away that propertie of tying to a place, then the like shall be perfourmed in all the bodies of the faythfull, because he shall change our base and vile bodyes, that they may be fashioned like vnto his glorious body. Philip. 3.21. But to say that our bodyes shall be euery where, were a beastly and blasphemous assertion; because it should ascribe that vnto vs, which is proper and peculiar one∣ly to God: For vnto him alone it pertaineth, to fill heauen, earth, and all places. Therefore this assertion concerning Christes glori∣fied body, must of necessitie be such likewise.
4 Fourthly, it doth de∣stroy all the Articles of our Fayth, which concerne Christes ascension in hea∣uen, sitting at the right hand of the Father, and his com∣ming againe, together with all the places of Scripture, that confirme those most holy, comfortable, and ne∣cessarie poyntes. For if he be heere in respect of his bodily power & presence, how can he be iustly said to haue ascended in respect of his bodie, into heauen, and to sit there at the right hand of his Father, making continuall intercession for vs? Or how can it be affir∣med, that from thence hee shall come with great pow∣er and glorie, to iudge the quicke and the dead, seeing
he is heere on earth already? Let men of the world deeme what they list, this is the truth that God hath sancti∣fied vnto vs in his word, and doe steadfastly beleeue it in my heart, and will through Gods goodnesse and strength, alwayes con∣fesse the same with my mouth, that from the time of his ascension, the heauens must containe Chistes na∣turall bodie, vntill the time that all thinges be restored, Actes 3.21. that is, euen to the worldes end. 5 Fifthly, I say that this opinion doth depriue vs of all the spirituall graces and comforts, that God the father in his sonne Christ, by sending the holy Ghost the third person in the Dei∣tie,
hath bestowed vpon the whole Church generally, and euery particular mem∣ber thereof. For, doeth not our Sauiour Christ say? Iohn. 16.7. I tell you the trueth: It is expedient for you that I goe away; for if I goe not away, that Com∣forter will not come vnto you: But if I depart, I will sende him vnto you. Either this then must be true, that we haue the holy Ghost by the bodily absence of our Sauiour Christ giuen to the Church, as before is sayd; or else if Christ be heere bodily present, the holy Ghost is not yet come; which you may see plaine∣ly ouerthrowne. Act. 2.1.2. 6 Sixthly, this assertion accuseth Christ of manifest
lying and vntrueth. For he himselfe hath said, Math. 26.11. The poore yee haue al∣wayes with you, but me ye shall not haue alwaies. And yet this people dare af∣firme, that wee haue him continually, not in respect of his spirituall power and presence onely, in which respect he filleth all places, both in heauen and in earth, and is sayd to be with the beleeuers euen vnto the end of the world Matth. 28.20. But in respect of corporall and bodily presence, then the which nothing can be more absurde, as hath been before shewed. But heere arise vp three speciall obiections, to be answered: two whereof, are taken for the wordes of
the text of holy Scripture, & the third from the omni∣potencie & almightie pow∣er of our Sauiour Christ: common thinges indeede, and might as easily be re∣iected as obiected: but yet both for the strengthening of them that stand, & for the satisfying & instruction of them that be weake and ig∣noraunt. I will in a word or two, as it were, make a short, yet a sound, sufficient, and true answere I hope, to euery one of them seuerally and by them selues. The first place obiected, were these wordes out of Iohn. 6.13. Except yee eate the flesh of the Sonne of man, and drinke his blood, yee haue no life in you. Wherevnto I answere, first,
that neither these wordes, neither the rest of the Chap∣ter, can properly be vnder∣stoode of the Lords supper; because that was not at that time instituted and ordei∣ned, but rather of our com∣munication or partaking with Christ, by the meanes of fayth apprehending the worde, and applying parti∣cularly vnto our selues, all the gracious and sweete promises, that the Lord hath made and offered vnto vs therein: which may ap∣peare, partly because hee persisteth by a a continuall threed of speach as it were, in the metaphor of Bread or Meates, mentioned vers. 26.27 vsing sundrie boro∣wed speaches agreeing well to the circumstaunce of the
matter, wherein he was to deale: and partly, because he speaketh so often not of eating onely, but also of beleeuing; as vers. 23.40. &c. Which cannot be pro∣perly attributed to any outward or materiall thing; as may be gathered, Rom. 8.24. Also 2. Corinth. 5.7. But let vs graunt that it were to be vnderstood of the holy Supper; yet it doth not for all that, establish any grosse and carnall eating of the naturall flesh or body of our Sauiour Christ: for if it were so, then had not our Sauiour sufficiently aun∣swered the Capernaites, who did grossely dreame and doate of such a carnal man∣ducation or eating, but ra∣ther had yeelded vnto the
same. Besides, if that should be allowed, in what a mise∣rable estate should we leaue the holy Fathers; who were long before the time of Christes taking our flesh vpon him, and therefore could not eate it? And yet our Sauiour affirmeth Mat. 8.11. that they were in the kingdome of Heauen: and Saint Paul saith 1. Corinth. 10.3.4 that they did all eate the same spirituall meate that we doe, and did all drinke the same spirituall drinke that we doe; there being no difference at all in respect of substaunce and effect be∣twixt their Sacraments and ours, but onely in time, and in outward Elementes: yet in what a miserable estate were Infantes that should
die before they could com∣municate or partake in that holy Sacrament? One of these two must needes be graunted; either that they must haue the Communion ministred vnto them; which thing indeed Augustine did once fantastically imagine: but S. Paul is flatly against it, 1. Corinth. 11.28. who will haue none admitted there∣to, but such as can examine and trie themselues, whe∣ther they be in the Fayth or no; which Infantes can not doe: or else that with∣out it, they are all con∣demned alreadie: Both which are verie absurde and beastly. So that you see for the auoyding of these absurdities, it can at no hande bee vnderstoode,
either of the Sacramentes, of the grosse and carnall ea∣ting of Christes body in the same, but of the appre∣hension or laying hold of him, togeather with the par∣ticular application of him to our selues by the hand or instrument Faith propoun∣ded and set foorth vnto vs, by the ministerie of his Word and Gospell, or (if you wil for reasoning sake) offered vnto vs in the vse of the Supper, because there is in that respect, but one meane giuen vs to take hold of him by; and that is the great grace and gift of Fayth, which we must vse in the Word & Sacraments, as men doe in the oppre∣hending of Christes righte∣ousnesse; which though it
be not essentially dwelling in vs, yet it is effectually made ours, whilest wee ap∣prehend and lay hold of the same by a sounde and sure Fayth: And euen in like sort is Christ God & Man togeather with all his me∣rites, not onely offered, but laide hold of in the Word and Sacramentes: For of like things, there is alwayes a like consideration. The seconde place, is that sentence reported by the three Euangelistes, Mat∣thew, Marke, and Luke; and S. Paul himselfe also, reci∣ting the institution of the Supper, which our Sauiour Christ vsed, saying: This is my body: which they vrge in the letter, after this sorte: Hath not Christ said
it in plaine tearmes? and shal I not beleeue it, though that my carnall vnderstan∣ding cannot conceiue the same? To all this I answere: First, that the question is not of the wordes, for wee as well as they confesse the same; but of the sense: of which wee will speake a∣none. Secondly, that wee, are bounde to beleeue all such thinges as are compre∣hended in Gods Worde, though indeed our sensuall reason, can not compre∣hend them; yet in such sort must we beleeue the same, and to such endes as the Lord himselfe hath appoin∣ted, not yet stretching them further, then the Lorde would haue vs; nor restrai∣ning them to narrow or
purposes, then the Lord hath appoynted; neither yet fayling in the allegati∣on of them, either in the matter, manner, or end: for if we doe, wee doe nothing else thereby but heape vp iust condemnation against our owne soules. Concer∣ning the wordes, and the plainenes of them; I say that other words are as plaine as they, both in the old and new testament, which must yet notwithstanding, be o∣therwise interpreted, then the words themselues seeme to import. For example in the 17 of Genesis 10. Cir∣cumcision is called the Co∣uenaunt betwixt GOD and his people, whereas it was but the signe of the Couenaunt: For the Coue∣naunt
it selfe was, that hee would be the God of Abra∣ham, and in him of all the Faythfull, and of their seed after them. So in the new Testament, Christ sayth of him selfe, Iohn 15.5. I am the Vine; whereas wee know and beleeue, that Christ was no Vine, but that hee calleth him selfe so in a cer∣taine resemblance; because looke what propertie the fruite of the Vine hath in respect of our bodies, to witt, to comfort men, and ro make them glad heartes: the same hath Christ, and the fruites of his grace re∣ceiued by Fryth, in respect af our soules: and as the Branches of the Vine haue nothing of them selues, but all that they haue, they haue
it from the Vine it selfe: so none of his members can bring foorth fruite, but by abyding in him; and being made fruitfull through his grace. In like manner is the Bread of the Lords Supper, called his Body, because, as we haue sayd before, looke what proper and peculiar office the Bread hath or yeeldeth to our naturall bo∣dies; the selfe same doth Ie∣sus Christes body broken, taken hold of by Faith, spi∣ritually communicate vnto our soules. And this speach is vsuall in the Scriptures, to attribute that to the signe, which is proper and pecu∣liar to the thing signified, by reason of the stre ght analogie, proportion, and agreement, which is be∣tweene
the signe, and the thing signified; and not in any other respect, of con∣substantiatiō, transubstan∣tiation, or any other such like fantasticall dotage. Beside, the verie circum∣stances of time, place, per∣son, and manner of doing, doe sufficiently prooue the vanitie and vntruth of this grosse interpretation. For this Sacrament being insti∣tuted by Christ him selfe a little before his death, in the presence of the Apo∣stles (who had all their sen∣ses satisfied in the behol∣ding, hearing, and feeling, of the naturall body of our Sauiour Christ) he him selfe sitting at the Table with them, and speaking these words in their presence and
hearing; it could not bee, that that bread, offered vnto them as the pledge of his body, should be his naturall bodie, or bodie of flesh, vnlesse you will say, that Christ had two bodies: one sitting at the table, institu∣ting the action of the Sup∣per; and an other borne in his handes, and deliuered vnto his Apostles: then the which, what can be, not onely more absurde and blasphemous, in respct of our Sauiour Christ him selfe; but also more vnpro∣fitable and vncertaine to vs, as which might prouoke vs to doubt, whether of his bodies were crucified for our transgressions? Now, as we doe iustly reiect this grosse sense, so for the in∣struction
of the ignoraunt, and strengthening of the weake, we wil in a few lines put downe the true mea∣ning of these wordes. For the better performaunce whereof, I would haue this to be noted. 1 In he first place, which I am sure also no man of sounde iudgement can well denie, that all wordes, and therefore these of the Sup∣per, must be expounded according to the subiect, argument, or matter where∣of they intreate: and there∣fore their speaking particu∣larly of the Lordes Supper, must of necessitie be vnder∣stood of the Sacrament of the body and blood of our Sauiour Christ, exhibited vnto vs in that Supper.
2 Secondly, I would haue this to be remembred, that seeing all confessr these wordes to be spoken of the Sacrament, we must not ga∣ther, that the word Body, is otherwise attributed to the Bread, then the nature and qualitie (as it were) of Sa∣cramentes will beare; for then if wee should graunt that, wee should easily de∣stroy and ouerthrow all Sa∣cramentes of the Church whatsoeuer; because in this behalfe, or respect, there is a like proportion to be ob∣serued in one, as in all: And if one be defaced in respect of a wrong sense, the least can hardly, or not at all stand vpright. 3 Thirdly, that this is the nature of all sacraments,
that the elementes and rites vsed in the same, be true and effectuall, not signes onely, but testimonies and pledges of these things, for the sig∣nifying and subiecting of which vnto our senses they were ordained: and yet when I vse the word, Signe, I would not bee taken as though I meant that they are bare, vaine, or vnprofi∣table Signes, such as Pain∣ters cōmonly vse to make, but euen thus farre-foorth effectuall, that it is no more true & certaine, that we see the same with our eyes, touch them with our hands, receiue them with our mou∣thes & eate them; then that is also as true and certaine, that the Lord exhibiteth and offereth vnto vs, what
so euer they represent vnto vs; that is, the verie bodie and bloud of our Sauiour Christ. These rules being thus then obserued, I gather and put downe this true & holie sense of these wordes: This is my body: that is to say, This Bread which Christ tooke, blessed, brake; & gaue vnto his Disciples, and appoynted to be the element of this action, is sa∣cramentally & spiritually, being receiued & eaten by Fayth, a sure signe & an ef∣fectuall pledge, that Christs body is become the spiritu∣all food & nourishment of our soules. And I vse these words, sacramentally & spi∣ritually, that therby I might meete with their grosse slaunder, who when they
heare of a signe, and a thing signified, say that wee doe euacuate and make of no force the Lordes Supper. No, we are so farre off from holding any such conclu∣sion, that we know and be∣leeue, that the beleeuers, doe beside the outward signes and elements, truely receiue by the meane of fayth, after a spirituall sort, that which is represented by the out∣ward elementes; to witte, whole Christ, with all his giftes and graces. And yet we doe not imagine, either transubstantiation, or any such like deuise; but onely thinke vpon and beleeue, the sacramentall coniuction of the signe and the thing signified, For those thinges can not stand with the truth
of Christes humanitie; as hath been bef re shewed: neither indeed are they ne∣cessarie for saluation. For, that we may be made par∣takers of Christ, it is not of necessitie required, that his Body should be really pre∣sent vpon the earth; but it rather behooueth vs, by the power of the holy Ghost, & through Fayth, to mount vp into Heauen, and there to lay hold of him, that we may sit with him in the hea∣uenly places, which in this life can not be performed in any other sort, then in a spirituall maner, & through fayth: which fayth is be∣gotten and confirmed in vs by the holy Ghost; where∣vnto hee vseth as instru∣mentes, the preaching of
Gods word, and the admi∣nistration and vse of the Sacramentes, by which all our senses are euē as it were prouoked & pearsed, whol∣ly to possesse Christ him selfe. So that you see, I doe figuratiuely expound these wordes, and not grossely; wherevnto I am drawne partly by these three gene∣rall Rules heretofore put downe, and partly by the verie dealings of the Papistes themselues; who doe not, neither in the Wine of the Supper, the other part of this Sacrament: neither in Baptisme, the other Sacra∣ment of the Church (which two alone God hath giuen vnto it) acknowledge any such grosse transubstantia∣tion or change; and yet I am
sure, there is as great reason why that alteration should be as well in the Water of Baptisme, & in the Wine of the Supper, as in the Bread thereof: If there be not, let them shew any cause, to the contrary if they can. There resteth now the third obiection, takē frō the omnipotencie or almightie power of our sauiour Christ pressed after this manner. Is not Christ God, and so by that meanes omnipotent? And can not hee performe the trueth of that hee hath spoken? To this I answere; that though we shold grant it as true, that Christ, as he is God, can doe all thinges, and be euery where: yet we know that as he is Man, he can not, and therefore the
questiō betweene the tran∣substantiators & vs, being now not of the presence of Christes deitie in the Sacra∣ment, but of the presence of his humaine body, wee say, that if wee should graunt this, yet could it no whit at all preiudice vs; neither could they gaine their cause thereby: for vnlesse they can prooue Christ as hee is Man, to be omnipotent, and euerie where (which thing they shall neuer bee able to doe) they haue sayd as much as if they had sayd nothing. But let vs for reasoning sake graunt, that Christ as hee is Man, were omnipo∣tent, euen as God the Fa∣ther is; doth it therefore follow, that because he can
doe euerie thing, hee there∣fore either will do the same, or indeed doth it? I suppose no. For besides, that in Scholes it is commonly said, à posse ad esse, the conse∣quence or reason is not good, which were suffici∣ent aunswere to this friuo∣lous and vaine obiection. Besides this I say, wee that are truely taught of God; doe know, that though we beleeue that the Lord can doe what so euer pleaseth him both in heauen and in earth; which serueth won∣derfully to magnifie his al∣mightie power, and greatly to strengthen our weake fayth; yet we beleeue firme∣ly, that he will not onely doe nothing, but that hee can not doe any thing in re∣gard
of vs, contrarie to that will of his, that he hath re∣uealed for vs in his word. And the reason of this is not the abridgement or shortning of his power (for be it farre frō mortall men, to presume in any thing, though neuer so little, to restraine the eternall pow∣er of the immortal God) but because his will and power in respect of vs, be so con∣ioyned and knit togeather that looke whatsoeuer he will do, that he can do; and looke whatsoeuer hee can doe, that he will doe. To make this plaine by an ex∣ample. We all know, that God in respect both of his selfe, and that all thinges are possible with him, can if he would, saue all men: and
yet we feare not to say, that in respect of vs he can not saue all men, because wee know by his reuealed will, that hee will not saue them all: For some must be the vesselles ordeined for de∣structiō, as well as others, vessels of saluation and e∣ternall life. The like may we say for this matter of the Supper; that though wee were perswaded, that Christ as he is man, might be euery where; yet because he hath reuealed in his Word, that he will haue his bodie to be circumscriptible and tyed to a place, to witt, Heauen; yea, which is more; to a cer∣taine place in Heauen, that therefore it can be no iniu∣rie at all to him, neither any debasing of his omnipo∣tent
power, to say that now he cannot be bodily in the Sacrament, much lesse bo∣dily in so many sacraments, as be celebrated and mini∣stred, in so sundry and infi∣nite places at one time. And this I thinke sufficient to all these Obiections, be∣ing willing heere, to finish this present short Treatise, sauing that I haue thought good in this place, to adde (euen as a challenge to the aduerse partie, and as mat∣ter of necessary instruction, to such as alreadie see the trueth) these three poyntes following. 1 FIrst, that I am readie in all holy loue, further to aunswere any thing, that Christianly shall be further
obiected concerning this Question: I say Christian∣ly obiected; for if any shall either curiously or capti∣ously propound any thing, I thinke it most conuenient, rather to leaue such in their owne folly, for a season, till it please God at some one time or other, euen extraor∣dinarily as it were, to make them to see the same, if it shall so please him, then to spend time, and to trauaile in satisfying of their vaine curiositie. 2 Secondly, that though this point of Transubstan∣tiation brought in by Pa∣pistes, be great and grosse, concerning the matter of the Supper, yet that they faile not alone herein, in that behalfe, but hold many
mo errours concerning that point, some of them as pal∣pable, if not more grosse and blasphemous then this, and some of them lesse: A few I will rehearse, desi∣ring others to consider of the rest. 1 First, in that they make it a sacrifice Propitiatorie for the quicke and the dead, vtterly euacuating by that meanes, and making of no force, the eternall Priest∣hood of our Sauiour Christ, which consisteth in this, that he hath once for all, vp∣on the Alter of the Crosse, offered vp himselfe vnto God the Father, a full and sufficient Sacrifice, for the sinnes of the people, as the Apostle plainely prooueth in the 7.8.9. and 10. Chap∣ters
of his Epistle to the He∣brewes: But no maruell, that they should annihilate his Offices, which destroy his person; as these men doe, by confounding the pro∣prieties of either nature, as hath been before decreed. 2 Secondly, there is but a little lesse Leuen in that matter, that they holde of Concountancie, by which they haue spoyled the peo∣ple of the vse of the Cuppe; which both by Christes owne institution, and by his expresse Commaunde∣ment, saying; Drinke yee all of this; doth in all trueth and vprightnesse belong vnto them: and all this they haue done vnder this sha∣dow, that because no body is without blood, and they
haue before (presupposing, that the Bread is turned in∣to the Bodie; as indeede if men will presuppose, ei∣ther vnpossible or vntrue things, euery thing will fol∣low of it) eaten the bodie, therefore must it needes fol∣low, that they haue drunke also his blood. But I know not, whether I shold blame them for their beastlinesse, or reprooue them for their pride, that dare thus pre∣sūptuously alter the Lordes very Ordinaunce and In∣stitution. 3 Thirdly, their Adora∣tion is as corrupt and fil∣thie, while they make men to cōmit grosse & palpable Idolatrie, in falling downe before a peece of Bread: (what doe I say? I know
not whether I may call it by that name or no, for it may be disputed of whether their Masse-cake be Bread) and worshipping a Wafer-cake, the worke of mens hands. But suppose it were Christes body as they say; yet I affirme that they may not adore Christes body a∣lone, yea, and that they can∣not worship the same of it selfe, without horrible ido∣latrie, because it is a crea∣ture. For though it be true, that Christ as he is God, is to be worshipped as his Fa∣ther; yea, and Christ God and Man in one person is to be adored, yet we cannot without great sinne, and grieuous offence against God and his word, wor∣ship the humanitie or man∣hood
of our Sauiour Christ onely. 4 To speake of the re∣seruation, circumgestation, or carrying of it about, with many other odde toyes of their owne inuention, and largely to lay out the incon∣ueniences thereof, would require some proper and fit discourse for that purpose; but I will reserue it till ano∣ther time, making haste now, to that which shalbe, as the last, so in my iudge∣ment, not the least profita∣ble part of this Treatie: And that is, how a man should draw neere vnto such reuerent mysteries, wherein such excellent gra∣ces are offered vnto him, and how he may best come to reape and receiue fruite
and comfort by the same. All that a man is to deale in, concerning this last point, may be well reduced into three short heades or Ti∣tles. 1 First, what he is to doe before communicating or receiuing of this Sacra∣ment: and this I will call in one terme, Preparation. 2 Secondly, what hee is to doe or thinke vpon in the time, and at the very instant of receiuing: and this I will name, Meditati∣on 3 Thirdly, what he is to doe after the time of recei∣uing: and this I will call, Action or Practise. 1 Preparation, which is the first, respecteth either God or man: Now, that
which concerneth God, is comprehended vnder true Fayth, and vnfeigned Re∣pentaunce, as that which concerneth man, is com∣prised vnder sounde loue. And I call them sound true, and vnfeigned, and yet not perfect, because per∣fection properly signify∣ing that, vnto which no∣thing can be added, cannot be founde in man during this life. And this I speake, partly to stop the mouthes of such as dreame of a per∣fection in this life; and part∣ly to teach vs that our im∣perfections should not hin∣der vs from drawing nigh thereto, (so that we doe not foster and foode our selues in them,) seeing that other∣wise the Sacrament should
stand vs in stead, if we were not vnperfect; for it is a helpe and succour ordeined by God, against our natu∣rall infirmitie and weake∣nesse. By Fayth, I meane not onely a generall beliefe, of all the Canonicall books of the old and new Testa∣ment; or a grounded know∣ledge alone of the poyntes and principles of Christian religion, but an assured per∣swasion, that whatsoeuer the Lord hath reuealed in his Word, as hee hath done the same for others, so he hath done it particularly for mee. So that this Fayth is necessarie to him that shall communicate, both because that otherwise hee being on the earth, cannot take hold of Christ in hea∣uen:
for faith is it by which he may apply vnto him∣selfe particularly Christ Ie∣sus and all his merites, to the assured feeling of the free pardone and full forgiue∣nesse of all his sinnes of the one side, and the imputati∣on of Christes righteous∣nesse on the other side, and also that thereby he may be assured, that that which hee doeth, either in the admini∣stration or participation of that holy action, is accep∣table before God: for with∣out Fayth, it is impossible to please him. Which pro∣perties indeed, or effectes rather, if a man onely haue them, shall make his Fayth to differ from all the vaine imaginations of Diuels and wicked men whatsoeuer.
By Repentance, I vnder∣stand a syncere hatred of all our former sinnes and ini∣quities whatsoeuer, and a sound loue of all righteous∣nesse and well doing, pro∣ceeding from the right re∣uerence and louing feare of the maiestie of God in our heartes: which holy affecti∣on, doth euery day by little and little worke in vs, the forsaking of our selues, and the subduing of the sinfull lustes and affections of our owne flesh, to the end, that wee may wholly resigne our selues, to be guided and gouerned by the spirit of God, in the syncere seruice, & worship of his Maiestie. So that hee which feeleth himselfe truely and vnfeig∣nedly sorrowfull for his
former iniquities, not onely loathing his sinnes, but euen himselfe for his sinnes sake, and caryeth with him this holy purpose, neuer through Gods assistaunce, to commit the same, or any such like: may not onely be assured of his vnfeined re∣pentaunce, and so by con∣sequent of the forgiuenesse of his sinnes, but also with boldnesse, & yet not with∣standing with reuerence in respect of God, and with humblenesse of minde, in respect of himselfe, draw neere to the partaking of these holy mysteries. By Loue, which is the thing that concerneth men, I doe not onely vnderstand the vnfeigned pardoning and forgiuing of others,
that haue any maner of way trespassed against vs, which is a sure seale and earnest pennie as it were, that our sinnes are forgiuen vs be∣fore God: but also sound reconciliation, after offen∣ces committed, one of vs towardes another, which is a certaine pledge, that our prayers, and all other good thinges that come from vs, are in Christes obedience accepted before God: yea, I meane further by Loue, which is an inward affecti∣on of the heart, the sincere and outwarde testifying of the same, by wordes, deeds, countenaunces, and other meanes, as the Lord shall giue occasion, and our abi∣litie will serue to expresse the same, and that not to
our friendes onely, or to our enimies also, which is somewhat more; but gene∣rally to all men, though to some in greater measure; as to the Household of fayth, our Wiues, Children, and Parentes, &c. and to some in lesse measure, as to those that be yet without and be somwhat further off by na∣ture and kindred. Meditation, which is the second thing, and is to be vsed specially in the time of the celebration of the Lords Supper, consisteth chiefely in these poyntes:  In regar∣ding the outward elements, and the rites vsed in the same, as the breaking of the Bread, &c. by which is set foorth vnto our soules, the crucifying of Christs body,
the shedding of his bloud, &c. and all for our trans∣gressions.  And then be∣cause wee must not stay be∣low, but must by Fayth rise vp to Heauen as it were, we are deeply to consider what great graces the Lord offe∣reth vnto vs in that holy and spirituall Banquet; which in my minde may be brought into these few pointes. 1 God setteth before the eyes of our Faith in that holy action, first, Christes death and passion, togea∣ther with the benefites and effectes which wee reape thereby; and namely, the remission and forgiuenesse of our sinnes. 2 Secondly, the full and spirituall nourishment, that
thorow Christ wee haue, both in the outward and inwarde man, euen to the hope of eternall life. 3 Thirdly, the mysticall vnion, that is betwixt Christ and his Church, hee dwelling in our heartes by faith, and we thereby be∣ing made members of his bodie, of his flesh, and of his bones. 4 Fourthly and lastly, the holy vnitie and agreement, that is & ought to be conti∣nued amongst all the mem∣bers of his Church, what∣soeuer, or wheresoeuer they be. The third and last thing, which I call Action, and is to be performed after the receiuing of the Lords Sup∣per, consisteth,
1 First, in earnest Prayer vnto God not onely for the liuely feeling of these gra∣ces exhibited, but also for the fructifying of the word of God and his Sacraments in our heartes; and that not for the time present alone, but euen for the whole rase and course of our life. Secondly, in humble thankes-giuing, for the vn∣estimable riches and trea∣sures of grace and of good∣nesse, which it pleaseth him in his Church, and namely by the vse of his Worde and Sacramentes, not onely to offer, but also to bestow vpon his people, the particulars whereof, are before recited. And hereunto wee may be pro∣uoked
by consideration of this, that the Lord freely and of his owne goodnesse, giueth vs those merites, not onely when we had not de∣serued the least of them, but euen then when euerie one of vs, had deserued eternall death and condemnation to be powred foorth vpon vs and ours. 3 And lastly, in care and conscience of a holy con∣uersation, that seeing Christ dwelleth in our heartes by fayth, and we haue our spi∣rituall life and beeing from him, that therefore wee should so liue, as wee may not onely glorifie him in this life, but that when the dayes of our wearisome pil∣grimage shall be ended, we may be glorified with him
in eternall blessednesse: which thing, the Lord graunt vs, euen for his cru∣cified Christes sake: to whom with the Father and the holy Ghost, three per∣sons and one eternall God, be giuen all honour, prayse, power, and glorie, both of vs, and of all people, euen now and at all times, for euer and euer. So be it.
A Prayer to be said before a man repaire to the parta∣king of the Lords Supper. O Eternall GOD and most mercifull Fa∣ther, I thy poore & vnworthy seruant, doe must humbly beseech thee, in Iesus Christ thy deare Sonnes name, and for his sake, gratiously in his death and obedience, to pardone and forgiue mee all my sinnes what so euer, which at any time, or by any manner of meane, I
haue committed against thy Maiestie, or any other. Seale vp in my heart, O Lord, this great benefite of the free pardon and full for∣giuenesse of all my sinnes, by the assured testimonie of thy blessed spirit, bearing record vnto my spirit, that I am thy Child, & by vnfeig∣ned pardoning & forgiuing of others, which any maner of way haue offended a∣gainst mee. Make the death & resurrectiō of thy Sonne so effectuall in mee, that I may not onely feele and finde in the same, the for∣giuenesse of my sinnes, and the hope of eternall salua∣tion: but that I may be in∣structed thereby all the dayes of my life, more and more to die vnto sinne, and
daily more and more to liue vnto righteousnes of life & holie conuersation. And for as much as through thy goodnesse I haue purposed this day, to communicate in the vse of thy Word and Sa∣cramentes, I beseech thee good Father, to prepare my heart, and to open the eares of my vnderstanding, that I may not onely reue∣rently and profitably hear∣ken to thy voyce, speaking vnto mee out of thy word, labouring all the dayes of my life, to conforme my selfe in practise to the obe∣dience thereof; but also, that I may fruitfully bee partaker of the fruites and effectes of the death and passion of thy deare Sonne, which it pleased thee in this
Sacrament to offer vnto me. To this end and purpose, I beseech thee to graunt, that I be not carried away in the contemplation and consideration of the earth∣ly and corruptible thinges obiected therein to my senses, but that my Fayth may be set vp and raised, to the beholding and assured feeling of those Graces, which it pleaseth thee by the same, to offer vnto mee. Giue me grace, good Lord, to bring with me a steadfast Fayth in the trueth of thy promises, that by it as by an eye, I may behold, & by the same, as by a hand, I may apprehend Iesus Christ thy Sonne, sitting at thy right hand, to be my onely and continuall iustifier, sancti∣fier,
and redeemer. Graunt me grace also, to bring with me, as an earnest, hatred of all my former euilles what∣soeuer; so a syncere loue of all righteousnesse and wel-doing, that I by the power of thy spirite, crucifying the Old man with the lustes and concupiscences therof, specially such as beare the greatest sway in mee, may be strengthened in the new man; dayly to thinke, speake, & doe those things, which may be acceptable and well pleasing in thy godly presence. And I be∣seech thee further, to giue me grace to bring with me, sound and syncere loue to∣wardes all, yea, euen to∣wardes mine enimies, that I may not onely forget and
forgiue all the iniuries and wronges that they haue de∣uised, sayd, or done, against mee: but also pray earnest∣ly vnto thy Maiestie for them, and purchase and procure their welfare and good, by all the meanes I can. Graunt, O deare Fa∣ther, that I being purged from the filth of sinne, may be made a fitte receptacle and dwelling place for thee and thy Sonne, to come and dwell in; so that spending my dayes in reuerence of thy Maiestie, in the bene∣fiting of my breathren, and procuring mine own good, I may finish my course in thy fayth, and so be made partaker of eternall glorie, through Iesus Christ thy Sonne, my Lord and onely Sauiour. So be it.
A prayer to be priuate∣ly vsed, after the publike exercises of the Church; as the preaching of the word, & the administra∣tion of the Lordes Supper shall be ended. I Doe vnfaignedly con∣fesse (good Father) that the graces are very great, yea, most excellent, which thou hast vouchsafed this day to bestowe vppon mee, wretched sinner that I am, by the vse and parta∣king of thy holy Word and Sacramentes: and namely for that it hath pleased thee thereby to increase my knowledge, to confirme my Fayth, to assure me that Ie∣sus Christ thy deare Sonne,
hath not onely died for me, but also giuen him selfe to be my spirituall nourish∣ment to eternall life and saluation, with innumera∣ble such other benefites and blessinges: For these, and whatsoeuer other mer∣cies, which thy Maiestie hath freely bestowed vpon me, I doe yeelde thee the humblest thankes and hear∣tiest prayse, that possibly I can; beseeching thee to accept mee, and this my Sa∣crifice of prayse & thanks∣giuing, according to the measure, that thou merci∣fully hast bestowed vpon me. And because I feele my selfe, thorough the cursed corruptiō of mine owne na∣ture, woonderfully inclined to the forgetfulnesse of thy
goodnesse, I beseech thee to graue these thinges in my heart with a claw of Ada∣mant, and to imprint them there, that by the sight thereof, and meditation therein, I may bee prouo∣ked, daily more and more to magnifie the multitude of thy mercies, which doest not onely bestow vpon me, these great and wonderfull graces; but euen then, when by the meanes of my sinnes, I had deserued eternall con∣demnation, hast gratiously giuen mee the same. And I pray thee further, to giue me grace (good Lord) to expresse this my thankful∣nesse towardes thee, not in wordes onely, but also in the deedes of a holy con∣uersation, that I daily in∣creasing,
and growing in a sound Fayth, which wor∣keth by loue, and bringeth foorth all good workes, may order and direct my whole life, to the aduaunce∣ment of thy glorie, the edi∣fication of my breathren, and mine owne eternall comfort at the last, through Iesus Christ thy Sonne, my Lord and one∣ly Sauiour. Amen. FINIS.
