C4362B R174069 [ocm]80922240 191836
THE CIVIL and MILITARY ARTICLES OF LIMERICK. Agreed upon the 3d Day of October, 1691. Between Sir Charles Porter Knight, and Thomas Coningsby, Esq; Lords Justices of Ireland, And His Excellency the Baron Ginckle, Lieutenant General and Commander in Chief of the English Army, on the one part. AND The Right Honourable Patrick, Earl of Lucan, Piercy Viscount Galmoy, Col. Nicholas Purcel, Col. Nicholas Cusack, Sir Toby Butler, Col. Garret Dillon, Col. John Brown. And Their Excellencies the Lieute∣nants Generals D'Ussoon and de Tessé, Commanders in chief of the Irish Army, on the other part. With the Ratification thereof un∣der the Great Seal of England, by their Majesties King William and Queen Mary.
GULIELMUS & Maria Dei Gratia, Angliae, Scotiae, Fran∣ciae & Hiberniae, Rex & Regi∣na, Fidei Defensores, &c. Omnibus ad quos Praesentes literae nostrae per∣venerint, salutem: Inspeximus Irro∣tulament. quarund. literarum paten∣tium de confirmatione geren. Dat. apud Westmonasterium vicesimo quar∣to die Februarii, ultimi Praeteriti in Cancellar. nostr. Irrotulat. ac ibi∣dem de Recordo remanen. in haec verba. WILLIAM and Mary, by the Grace of God, &c. To all to whom these Presents shall come, Greeting. Whereas certain Articles, bearing Date the third Day of October last past, Made and Agreed on between Our Justices of Our Kingdom of Ireland, and Our General of Our Forces there on the one Part; and several Officers there, Commanding within the City of Limerick in Our said Kingdom, on the other Part. Whereby Our said Justices and Ge∣neral did undertake that We should ratify those Articles, within the Space of eight Months, or sooner; and use their utmost Endeavours that the same should be Ratified and Con∣firmed in Parliament. The Tenour of which said Articles, is as follows, viz.
In Consideration of the Surrender of the City of Limerick, and other Agree∣ments made between the said Lieute∣nant General Ginckle the Governor of the City of Limerick, and the Generals of the Irish Army, bearing Date with these Presents, for the Surrender of the said City, and Sub∣mission of the said Army: It is agreed, That ART. I. THE Roman Catholicks of this Kingdom shall enjoy such Privileges in the Exercise of their Religion, as are consistent with the Laws of Ireland, or as they did en∣joy in the Reign of King Charles the IId: And their Majesties, as soon as their Affairs will permit them to summon a Parliament in this King∣dom, will endeavour to procure the said Roman Catholicks such farther Se∣curity in that Particular, as may pre∣serve them from any Disturbance up∣on the Account of their said Reli∣gion. ART. II. All the Inhabitants or Residents of Limerick, or any other Garrison now in the Possession of the Irish, and all Officers and Soldiers, now in Arms, under any Commission of King James, or those authorized by him to grant the same in the several Counties of Limerick, Clare, Kerry, Cork and Mayo, or any of them; and all the Commissioned Officers in their Majesties Quarters,
that belong to the Irish Regiments, now in Being, that are treated with, and who are not Prisoners of War, or have taken Protection, and who shall return and submit to their Majesties Obedience; THEIR AND EVERY OF THEIR HEIRS, shall hold, possess and enjoy all, and every their Estates of Free-hold, and Inheritance; and all the Rights, Titles and Interests, Privileges and Immunities, which they, and every, or any of them held, enjoyed, or were rightfully and lawfully intitled to, in the Reign of King Charles the IId. or at any Time since, by the Laws and Statutes that were in Force in the said Reign of King Charles the IId. and shall be put in Possession, by Order of the Go∣vernment, of such of them as are in the King's Hands, or the Hands of his Tenants, without being put to any Suit or Trouble therein; and all such Estates shall be freed and discharged from all Arrears of Crown∣rents, Quit-rents, and other publick Charges, incurred and become due since Michaelmas 1688, to the Day of the Date hereof: And all Persons comprehended in this Article, shall have, hold, and enjoy all their Goods and Chattels, real and perso∣nal, to them or any of them belong∣ing, and remaining either in their own Hands, or the Hands of any Persons whatsoever in Trust for, or for the Use of them, or any of them: AND ALL AND EVERY THE SAID PERSONS, OF WHAT PROFESSION, TRADE OR CALLING SOEVER THEY BE, shall and may use, exercise and practise their several and respective Professions, Trades and
Callings, as freely as they did use, exercise and enjoy the same in the Reign of King Charles Ild. Provi∣ded, that nothing in this Article contained, be construed to extend to, or restore any forfeiting Person now out of the kingdom, except what are hereafter comprized: Pro∣vided also, That no person whatso∣ever shall have or enjoy the benefit of this Article, that shall neglect or refuse to take the The Oath of Fidelity or Allegiance required by the second Article of this Treaty. I A. B. do sincerely promise and swear, that I will be faithful, and bear true Allegiance to their Majesties King William and Queen Mary. So help me God.  oath of Allegiance, made by Act of Parliament in Eng∣land, in the First Year of the Reign of their present Majesties, when thereunto required. ART. III. All merchants, or reputed mer∣chants of the city of Limerick, or of any other garrison now possessed by the Irish, or of any town or place in the counties of Clare or Kerry, who are absent beyond the seas, that have not bore arms since their majesties de∣claration in February 1688, shall have the benefit of the second Article, in the same manner, as if they were pre∣sent; provided, such merchants, and reputed merchants, do repair into this kingdom within the space of eight months after the date hereof.
ART. IV The following Officers, viz. Co∣lonel Simon Lutterel, Captain Row∣land White, Maurice Eustace of Yermanstown, Chievers of Maystown, commonly called Mount-Leinster, now belonging to the regiments in the aforesaid garrisons and quarters of the Irish army, who were beyond the seas, and sent thither upon af∣fairs of their respective regiments, or the Army in general, shall have the benefit and Advantage of the second article; provided they return hither within the space of eight months from the date of these pre∣sents, and submit to their Majesties government, and take the above∣mentioned oath. ART. V. That all and singular, the said persons comprized in the second and third Articles, shall have a general pardon of all Attainders, Outlawries, Treasons, Misprisons of Treason, Premunires, Felonies, Tres∣passes, and other Crimes and Mis∣demeanors whatsoever, by them, or any of them committed since the beginning of the Reign of King James the lid. and if any of them are attainted by Parliament, the Lords Justices, and General, will use their best endeavours to get the same re∣pealed by Parliament, and the Out∣lawries to be reversed Gratis, all but Writing Clerks Fees.
ART. VI. And whereas these present Wars have drawn on great violences on both parts, and that if leave were given to the bringing all sorts of private actions, the animosities would probably continue, that have been too long on foot, and the publick disturbances last: For the quieting and settling therefore of this Kingdom, and avoiding those incon∣veniencies which would be the ne∣cessary consequence of the contrary, no person or persons whatsoever, comprized in the foregoing Articles, shall be sued, molested, or impleaded at the suit of any party or parties whatsoever, for any Treaspasses by them committed, or for any Arms, Horses, Money, Goods, Chattels, Merchandizes, or Provisions what∣soever, by them seized or taken, du∣ring the time of the War. And no person or persons whatsoever, in the second or third Articles comprized, shall be made accountable for the Rents or mean rates of any Lands, Tenements, or Houses, by him or them received, or enjoyed in this Kingdom, since the beginning of the present War, to the day of the date hereof, nor for any waste or trespass, by him or them committed in any such Lands, Tenements, or Houses: And it is also agreed, that this Arti∣cle shall be mutual, and reciprocal, on both sides.
ART. VII. Every Nobleman and Gentleman comprized in the said second and third Articles, shall have liberty to ride with a Sword, and a Case of Pistols, if they think fit; and keep a Gun in their Houses, for the defence of the same, or for Fowling. ART. VIII. The Inhabitants and Residents in the city of Limerick, and other garrisons, shall be permitted to re∣move their goods, chattels, and pro∣visions, out of the same, without being viewed and searched, or pay∣ing any manner of duties, and shall not be compelled to leave the hou∣ses or lodgings they now have, for the space of six Weeks next en∣suing after the date hereof. ART. IX. The Oath to be administred to such Roman-Catholicks as submit to their Majesties government, shall be the Oath abovesaid, and no other. ART. X. No person or persons, who shall at any time hereafter break these Articles, or any of them, shall thereby make, or cause any other person or persons, to forfeit or lose the benefit of the same.
ART. XI. The Lords Justices and General do promise to use their utmost en∣deavours, that all the persons com∣prehended in the above mentioned Articles, shall be protected and defended from all arrests and ex∣ecutions for debt or damage, for the space of eight Months, next ensuing the date hereof. ART. XII. The Lords Justices and General do undertake, that their Majesties will ratify these Articles, within the space of eight Months, or sooner, and use their utmost endeavours, that the same shall be ratified and confirmed in Parliament. ART. XIII. Lastly, And whereas Colonel John Brown stood indebted to se∣veral Protestants, by Judgments of Record, which appearing to the late Government, the Lord Tyrconnel, and Lord Lucan, took away the ef∣fects the said John Brown had to an∣swer the said debts, and promised to clear the said John Brown of the said debts; which effects were taken for the publick use of the Irish, and their army: For frceing the said Lord Lucan of his said engagement, passed on their publick account, for pay∣ment
of the said Protestants, and for preventing the ruin of the said John Brown, and for satisfaction of his Creditors, at the instance of the Lord Lucan, and the rest of the persons aforesaid, it is agreed. That the said Lords Justices, and the said Baron de Ginckle, shall intercede with the King and Parliament, to have the estates secured to Roman-Catholicks, By Articles and Capitulation in this Kingdom, charged with, and equally liable to the payment of so much of the said debts, as the said Lord Lu∣can, upon stating accompts with the said John Brown, shall certify under his hand, that the effects taken from the said Brown amount unto; which accompt is to be stated, and the bal∣lance certified by the Lord Lucan in one and twenty days after the date hereof: For the true performance hereof, We have hereunto set our hands, Present, Scravemore. H. Maccay. T. Talmash. Char. Porter Tho. Coningsby. Bar. De Ginckle.
AND Whereas the said City of Limerick hath been since, in pursuance of the said Articles, sur∣rendered unto Us Now know ye, that We having considered of the said Articles, are graciously pleased here∣by to declare, that We do for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, as far as in Us lies, Ratifie and Confirm the same, and every Clause, Mat∣ter and Thing therein contain∣ed. And as to such parts thereof, for which an Act of Parliament shall be found to be necessary, We shall recommend the same to be made good by Parliament, and shall give Our Royal As∣sent to any Bill or Bills, that shall be passed by Our two Houses of Par∣liament to that purpose. And where∣as it appears unto Us, that it was a∣greed between the parties to the said Articles, that after the Words, Li∣merick, Clare, Kerry, Cork, Mayo, or any of them, in the second of the said Articles, the Words following, viz. [And all such as are under their Protection in the said Counties,] should be inserted, and be part of the said Articles: Which Words having been casually omitted by the Writer, the Omission was not discovered till after the said Articles were signed, but was taken notice of before the se∣cond Town was surrendered: And as Our said Justices, and General, or one of them, did promise that the said Clause should be made good, it being within the Intention of the Capitulation, and inserted in the foul Draught thereof: Our further Will
and Pleasure is, and We do hereby Ratify and Confirm the said omitted Words, viz. [and all such as are under their Protection in the said Counties] hereby for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, ordaining and de∣claring, that all and every Person and Persons therein concerned, shall and may have, receive, and enjoy the Benefit thereof, in such and the same Manner, as if the said Words had been inserted in their proper Place, in the said second Article; any Omission, Defect, or Mistake in the said second Article, in any wise notwithstanding. Provided always, and Our Will and Pleasure is, that these Our Letters Patents shall be enrolled in Our Court of Chancery in Our said Kingdom of Ireland, with∣in the Space of one Year next en∣suing. In Witness, &c. Witness Our Self at Westminster, the twenty fourth Day of February, Anno Regni Regis & Reginae Gulielmi & Mariae Quar∣to per Breve de Privato Sigillo. Nos autem Tenorem Premissor. Praedict. Ad Requisitionem Attornat. General. Domi∣ni Regis & Dominae Reginae pro Regno Hiberniae, duximus exemplificand. per Praesentes. In cujus Rei Testimonium Has Literas Nostras Fieri Fecimus Pa∣tentes. Testibus Nobis Ipsis apud West. Quinto die Aprilis, Anno{que} Regni Eo∣rum Quarto. BRIDGES. Examinat. per nos S. Keck Lacon Wm. Childe In Cancel. Magistros.
MILITARY ARTICLES AGREED UPON Between the Baron de Ginckle, Lieutenant General and Com∣mander in Chief of the English Army, on the one part. AND The Lieutenants Generals D'Ussoon and de Tessê, Commanders in chief of the Irish Army, on the other; and the General Officers hereunto Subscribing. ART. I. THAT all persons, without any exception, of what quality or condition soever, that are willing to leave the Kingdom of Ireland, shall have free liberty to go to any coun∣try beyond the seas (England and Scotland excepted) where they think fit, with their Families, Houshold-stuff, Plate and Jewels.
ART. II. That all General Officers, Colo∣nels, and generally all other Officers of Horse, Dragoons and Foot Guards, Troopers, Dragoons, Soldiers of all kinds, that are in any Garrison, Place or Post, now in the hands of the Irish, or encamped in the Coun∣ties of Cork, Clare and Kerry, as also those called Rapparees, or Voluntiers, that are willing to go beyond Seas as aforesaid, shall have free leave to imbark themselves where-ever the Ships are, that are appointed to transport them; and to come in whole bodies, as they are now com∣pos'd, or in parties, companies, or otherwise without having any im∣pediment, directly or indirectly. ART. III. That all persons above-mentioned, that are willing to leave Ireland, and go into France, shall have leave to declare it at the time and places hereafter mentioned, viz. The Troops in Limerick on Tuesday next in Li∣merick; the Horse, at their Camp on Wednesday; and the other Forces that are dispersed in the Counties of Clare, Kerry, and Cork on the 8th Instant, and on none other, before Monsieur Tameron, the French Inten∣dant, and Colonel Withers; and after such Declaration is made, the Troops that will go into France must remain under the Command and Discipline of their Officers, that are to conduct them thither: And Deserters of each
side shall be given up and punished accordingly. ART. IV. That all English and Scotch Officers, that serve now in Ireland, shall be included in this Capitulation, as well for the security of their Estates and Goods, in England, Scotland, and Ireland, (if they are willing to re∣main here) as for passing freely into France, or any other Country to serve. ART. V. That all the General French Officers, the Intendant, the Engineers, the Commissaries at War, and of the Artillery, the Treasurer, and other French Officers, Strangers, and all o∣thers whatsoever, that are in Sligo, Ross, Clare, or in the Army, or that do trade or commerce, or are other∣wise employed in any kind of station or condition, shall have free leave to pass into France, or any other Coun∣try; and shall have leave to ship themselves, with all their Horses, Equipage, Plate, Papers, and all their Effects whatever; and that General Ginckle will order Pass-ports for them, Convoys, and Carriages by Land and Water, to carry them safe from Li∣merick, to the Ships where they shall be imbarked, without paying any thing for the said Carriages, or to those that are employed therein, with their Horses, Carrs, Boats and Shal∣lops.
ART. VI. That if any of the aforesaid Equi∣pages, Merchandize, Horses, Money, Plate, or other Moveables, or Hou∣shold stuff, belonging to the said Irish Troops, or to the French Offi∣cers, or other particular persons what∣soever, be robb'd, destroy'd, or ta∣ken away by the Troops of the said General; the said General will order it to be restored, or payment to be made, according to the value that is given in upon Oath by the person so robbed or plundered: And the said Irish Troops to be transported as a∣foresaid, And all other persons be∣longing to them, are to observe good order, in their march and quarters: and shall restore whatever they shall take from the Country, or make re∣stitution for the same. ART. VII. That, to facilitate the transporting the said Troops, the General will furnish 50 Ships, each Ship Bur∣then 200 Tons; for which, the per∣sons to be transported, shall not be obliged to pay; and 20 more if there shall be occasion, without their pay∣ing for them; and if any of the said Ships shall be of lesser burthen, He will furnish more in number to countervail; and also give two Men of War to imbark the Principal Of∣ficers, and serve for a convoy to the vessels of burthen.
ART. VIII. That a Commissary shall be im∣mediately sent to Cork, to visit the transport Ships, and what condition they are in for sailing; and that as soon as they are ready, the troops to be transported, shall march with all convenient speed, the nearest way, in order to embark there. And if there shall be any more men to be transported, than can be carried off in the said 50 Ships, the rest shall quit the English town of Limerick, and march to such quarters as shall be appointed for them, convenient for their transportation; where they shall remain till the other 20 Ships be ready, which are to be in a Month; and may embark on any French Ship, that may come in the mean time. ART. IX. That the said Ships shall be fur∣nish'd with forrage for Horse, and all necessary provisions to subsist the Officers, Troops, Dragoons, and Sol∣diers, and all other persons that are shipped to be transported into France; which provisions shall be paid for, as soon as all are disimbarked at Brest or Nants, upon the coast of Brita∣ny, or any other port of France they can make. ART. X. And to secure the return of the said Ships, (the danger of the Seas
excepted) and payment for the said provisions, sufficient hostages shall be given. ART. XI. That the garrisons of Clare-Castle, Ross, and all other foot that are in Garrisons, in the Counties of Clare, Cork, and Kerry, shall have the advan∣tage of this present Capitulation; and such part of those Garrisons as design to go beyond Seas, shall march out with their Arms, Baggage, Drums beating, Ball in Mouth, Match light∣ed at both ends, and Colours flying, with all the provisions, and half the Ammunition that is in the said Gar∣risons, and join the Horse that march to be transported; or if then there's not shipping enough for the body of Foot that is to be next transported after the Horse, General Ginckle will order, that they be furnished with car∣riages for that purpose; and what provisions they shall want in their march; they paying for the said provisions; or else, that they may take it out of their own Magazines. ART. XII. That all the troops of Horse and Dragoons, that are in the Counties of Cork, Kerry, and Clare, shall also have the benefit of this Capitulation; and that such, as will pass into France, shall have Quarters given them in the Counties of Clare and Kerry, apart from the Troops that are commanded by General Ginckle, until they can be shipped; and within their quarters,
they shall pay for every thing, ex∣cept Forrage, and Pasture for their Horses, which shall be furnish'd gratis. ART. XIII. Those of the garrison of Sligo, that are joined to the Irish army, shall have the benefit of this Capitula∣tion; and orders shall be sent to them that are to convey them up, to bring them hither to Limerick the shortest way. ART. XIV. The Irish may have liberty to tran∣sport 900 Horse, including Horses for the Officers, which shall be tran∣sported Gratis, and as for the Troopers that stay behind, they shall dispose of themselves as they shall think fit; giving up their Horses, and Arms to such persons as the General shall appoint. ART. XV. It shall be permitted to those that are appointed to take care for the subsistence of the Horse, that are willing to go into France, to buy Hay and Corn at the King's rates, where∣ever they can find it, in the quarters that are assigned for them, without any left or molestation; and to car∣ry all necessary Provisions out of the City of Limerick: And for this pur∣pose the General will furnish conve∣ment carriages for them to the pla∣ces, where they shall be imbarked.
ART. XVI. It shall be lawful to make use of the Hay preserved in the Stores of the County of Kerry, for the Horses that shall be imbarked; and if there be not enough, it shall be lawful to buy Hay and Oats, wherever it shall be found, at the King's rates. ART. XVII. That all Prisoners of War, that were in Ireland the 28th of Septem∣ber, shall be set at liberty on both sides; and the General promises to use his endeavours, that those that are in England and Flanders shall be set at liberty also. ART. XVIII. The General will cause provisions and medicines to be furnished to the sick and wounded Officers, Troopers, Dragoons, and Soldiers of the Irish army, that cannot pass into France at the first imbarkment; and after they are cured, will order them Ships to pass into France, if they are willing to go. ART. XIX. That at the signing hereof, the General will send a Ship express to France; and that besides, he will furnish two small Ships of those that are now in the river of Limerick, to transport two Persons into France, that are to be sent to give notice of this Treaty;
and that the commanders of the said Ships shall have orders to put ashore at the next part of France, where they shall make. ART. XX. That all those of the said Troops, Officers, and others, of what cha∣racter foever, that would pass into France, shall not be stopt upon the account of debt or any other pretext. ART. XXI. If after signing this present Treaty, and before the arrival of the fleet, a French packet-boat, or other transport ship, shall arrive from France, in any other part of Ireland, the General will order a pass-port, not only for such as must go on board the said Ships, but to the Ships, to come to the nearest port to the place where the troops to be transported shall be quartered. ART. XXII. That after the arrival of the said fleet, there shall be free communi∣cation and passage between it and the quarters of the abovesaid troops; and especially, for all those that have passes from the chief commanders of the said fleet, or from Monfreur Ta∣meron the Intendant. ART. XXIII. In consideration of the present Ca∣pirulation, the two towns of Lime∣rick
shall be delivered, and put into the hands of the General, or any o∣ther person he shall appoint at the time and days hereafter specified, viz. the Irish town, except the magazines and hospital, on the day of the sign∣ing of these present articles; and as for the English town, it shall remain, together with the island, and the free passage of Thomond-bridge, in the hands of those of the Irish army that are now in the garrison, or that shall hereafter come from the counties of Corke, Clare, Kerry, Sligoe, and other places abovementioned, until there shall be convenience found for their transportation. ART. XXIV. And to prevent all disorders that may happen between the garrison that the General shall place in the Irish town, which shall be delivered to him, and the Irish troopers that shall remain in the English town, and the island, which they may do, until the troops to be imbarked on the first 50 ships shall be gone for France, and no longer; they shall intrench themselves on both sides, to hinder the communication of the said gar∣risons: And it shall be prohibited on both sides, to offer any thing that is offensive; and the parties offending shall be punished on either side. ART. XXV. That it shall be lawful for the said garrison to march out all at once, or at different times, as they can be
embarked, with Arms, Baggage, Drums beating, Match lighted at both ends, Bullet in Mouth, Colours flying, six Brass Guns, such as the besieged will chuse, two Mortar∣pieces, and half the Ammunition that is now in the Magazines of the said place: And for this purpose, an in∣ventory of all the Ammunition in the garrison shall be made, in the presence of any person that the Ge∣neral shall appoint, the next day af∣ter these present articles shall be signed. ART. XXVI. All the magazines of provisions shall remain in the hands of those that are now employed to take care of the same, for the subsistence of those of the Irish army that will pass into France: And if there shall not be sufficient in the stores, for the support of the said troops, whilst they stay in this kingdom, and are croffing the seas, that, upon giving up an account of their numbers, the General will furnish them with suf∣ficient provisions, at the King's rates, and that there shall be a free market at Limerick, and other quarters, where the said troops shall be: And in case any provision shall remain in the ma∣gazines of Limerick, when the town shall be given up, it shall be valued, and the price deducted out of what is to be paid for the provisions to be furnished to the troops on shipboard.
ART. XXVII. That there shall be a cessation of arms, at Land, as also at Sea, with respect to the ships, whether English, Dutch, or French, design'd for the transportation of the said troops, until they shall be returned to their respective harbours; and that on both sides, they shll be furnished with sufficient pass orts, both for ships and men: And if any sea Comman∣der, or Captain of a ship, or any Officer, Trooper, Dragoon, Soldier, or any other person, shall act contrary to this cessation, the persons so act∣ing, shall be punished on either side, and satisfaction shall be made for the wrong that is done; and Officers shall be sent to the mouth of the ri∣ver of Limerick, to give notice to the Commanders of the English and French fleets, of the present conjuncture, that they may observe the Cessation of arms accordingly. ART. XXVIII. That for the security of the exe∣cution of this present capitulation, and of each article therein contain∣ed, the besieged shall give the fol∣lowing hostages — And the Ge∣neral shall give — ART. XXIX. If before this capitulation is fully executed, there happens any change in the government, or command in
ARTICLES Civiles et Militaires DE LIMERICK, Conclus le troisiême d'Octo∣bre 1691. Entre le Chevalier Charles Porter, le Sieur Thomas Coningsby Ecuyer Seigneurs Justiciers d'Irlande. Et son Excellence le Baron Ginckle, Lieutenant General, & Commandant en chef de l'ar∣mée Angloise d'un coté. ET Le Seigneur Patrice Comte de Lucan, le sieur Piercy Vicomte de Galmoy, les Sieurs Nicolas Purcel Colonel, Nicolas Cusack Colonel, le Chevalier Theobald Butler, les Sieurs Garret Dillon Colonel, & Jean Brown Colonel. Et leurs Excellences les Lieutenants Generaux D'Ussoon et de Tessé Commandants en chef de l'ar∣mée Irlandoise, de l'autre coté. Avec la ratification de ces Articles par leurs Majestez Le Roy Guillaume et la Reine Marie Sous le grand Seau d'Angleterre.
GULIELMUS & Maria Dei Gratia, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae & Hiberniae, Rex & Regina, Fidei Defensores, &c. Omnibus ad quos Praesentes literae nostrae pervene∣rint, salutem: Inspeximus Irrotula∣ment. quarund. literarum patentium de confirmatione geren. Dat. apud West∣monasterium vicesimo quarto die Fe∣bruarii ultimi praeteriti in Cancellar. nostr. Irrotulat. ac ibidem de Recordo remanen. in haec verba. GUILLAUME & Marie par la grace de Dieu, &c. à tous ceux qui ces pre∣sentes verront, salût. Comme certains Articles en date du troisiême d'Octobre dernier, faits & conclûs par nos justiciers de nôtre Royaume d'Irlande, & le General de nos armeés dans le dit païs d'une part; & plusieurs offi∣ciers commandans dans la ville de Li∣merick dans nôtre dit Royaume de l'autre part: par lesquels Articles nos dits Justiciers & General se sont en∣gagez, que nous ratifierions les dits Ar∣ticles dans huit mois ou même plutot, & qu'ils feroient tout leur possible pour les faire aussi ratifier & confirmer en Par∣lement. La teneur des dits Articles est comme il s'ensuit.
En consideration de la reddition de la ville de Limerick, & autres stipu∣lations passées entre le dit Lieute∣nant General Ginckle, le Gouver∣neur de la ville de Limerick, & les Generaux de l'armée Irlandoise, de la même date, que les presentes, à cause de la reddition de la dite ville & soumission de la dite ar∣mée, on est convenu que, ART. I. LES Catholiques Romains de ce Royaume jouiront dans l'exercice de leur religion de tous les privile∣ges non contraires aux Loix d'Irlande, ou comme ils en ont joui sous le regne du Roy Charles Second. Et leurs Ma∣jestez, aussitôt que la situation de leurs affaires leur permettra de convoquer un Parlement en ce Royaume, tacheront de procurer aux dits Catholiques Romains toutes les autres seuretez necessaires pour empêcher qu'ils ne soient aucunement in∣quietez ou molestez pour cause de Reli∣gion. ART. II. Tous les habitans & autres qui re∣sident à Limerick ou dans aucune autre des garnisons actuellement dans la possession des Irlandois & tous les of∣ficiers & soldats portants armes par commission du Roy Jacques, ou de ceux par luy authorisez pour cet effet dans les Comtez de Limerick, de Clare, Kerry, Corke, & Mayo, ou dans au∣cune Comté d'icelles, & tous les offi∣ciers en Commission qui se trouvent dans
les quartiers de leurs Majestez, & ser∣vent dans les regimens Irlandois qui sont actuellement en pied & avec les∣quels se fait le present traité, & ne sont pas prisonniers de guerre, ou ont accepté sauvegarde ou protection, & qui voudront revenir & se soumettre à l'o∣beissance de leurs majestez, TOUS ET CHACUN DE LEURS HE∣RITIERS tiendront, possederont & joûiront de toutes & chacune de leurs terres biens en fond & au∣tres biens & heritages, & de tous les aroits, titres, interests, privileges, im∣munitez ou franchises, dont ils ou au∣cun d'eux ont joui ou avoit droit de jouir sous le regne de Charles Second, ou dans aucun autre tems depuis selon les loix & ordonnances qui etoient en force pendant le dit Regne de Charles second & seront mis en possession par ordre du go∣vernement, paisiblement & sans procés de telles parties de leurs biens qui se trouvent entre les mains du Roy ou des ses fermiers. Et tous les biens de cette nature seront libres & dechargez de tout arrerage de rentes royales & autres rentes ou impots publics establis & echûs depuis la sainte Michel de l'année 1688 jusqu'au jour de la datte du present traité: Et tou∣tes les personnes comprises dans cet ar∣ticle, auront, tiendront & jouiront de tous leurs biens meubles & immeubles à eux ou à aucun d'eux appartenans & restans, soit entre leurs propres mains ou es mains de ceux par eux employez par fidei commis & confiance, pour me∣nager leurs interests. ET TOUTES ET CHACUNE DES DITES PERSONNES DE QUELQUE PROFESSION, MEIIER VO∣CATION QU'ELLES SOIENT pourront suivre & exercer leurs dites professions ou mêtiers avec la même fran∣chise & liberté qu'etles ont eue sous le
Regne de Charles Second, pourveu que rien contenu dans cet article s'explique a s'etendre au retablissement des per∣sonnes actuellement hors du Royaume, dont les biens sont sujets a Confiscation, à l'exception neanmoins de ceux cy après compris. Pourveu aussi que personne ne puisse participer des avantages portez par cet article, qui negligera ou refusera de preter lorsqu'il en sera requis, Le serment de Fidelité ou Alle∣giance requis par le second Article de ce Traité. JE A. B. promets avec sincerité & jure, que je fidelité & vraye Lige∣ance porteray à leurs Majestez le Roy Guillaume & la Reine Marie. Qu'ainsi Dieu me soit en aide. le ser∣ment de fidelité porté par arrêt du par∣lement d'Angleterre la premiere année du Regne du Roy & de la Reine d'au∣jourd'huy. ART. III. Tous marchands, ou reputez marchands de la ville de Limerick, ou d'aucune autre garnison à cette heure dans la pos∣session des Irlandois, ou d'aucune autre ville ou place dans les comtez de Clare & Kerry, qui sont absens au-de-la des mers, & qui n'ont point porté les armes contre leurs Majestez depuis la declara∣tion de leurs Majestez publiée au mois de Fevrier 1688, auront & participeront des avantages du second Article tout comme s'ils éussent été presens; pourveu que tels marchands, ou reputez marchands reviennent au Royaume dans l'espace de huit mois à conter de la date des presens.
ART. IV. Les efficiers, dont les noms s'ensui∣vent, scavoir, le Colonel Simon Lut∣trel, le Capitaine Roland White, les sieurs Maurice Eustace de Yer∣manstown, Chievers de Maystowne communement appellé Montleinster servans actuellement dans les Regi∣mens qui sont dans les susdites garnisons & quartiers de l'armée Irlandoise, qui ont été envoyez hors du pays pour les affaires de leurs Regimens respectives ou de l'armée Irlandoise en general, rece∣vront & profiteront des avantages de l'article second, pourveu qu'ils reviennent au Royaume dans l'espace de huit mois, a conter de la date des presens, & qu'ils se soumettent au gouvernementde leur Ma∣jestez & qu'ils pretent le serment cy dessus specifié. ART. V. Que toutes & chacune des dites personnes comprises dans le 2d & 3me Articles, auront une amnestie ou par∣don generale de toutes sortes de con∣victions, proscriptions, condamnations par contumace, pour crimes de leze Majesté, de tous crimes punissables de mort de toutes autres transgressions des loix par eux ou aucun d'eux commises depuis le commencement du Regne du Roy Jacques second. Et que si aucun d'eux soit con∣damné par Arrêt du Parlement, les seignenrs de la Regence & le General tacheront de faire annuller cet Arrêt de condamnation en Parlement & de re∣voquer les proscriptions gratis, excepté ce qu'on doit payer aux clercs ecrivains.
ART. VI. Et d'autant que les presentes Guer∣res ont attiré sur les deux parties opposées beaucoup de torts & de vio∣lences, & que s'il etoit permis aux particuliers d'intenter des procez sur les dites violences; les animosités publi∣ques, qui ont deja duré, trop long tems, pourroient encore continuer: Pour donc retablir le repos & la paix de ce Royaume & pour obvier aux in∣conveniens qui seroient la consequence im∣manquable de telles procedures, il est stipulé qu'aucum de ceux qui sont com∣pris dans les susdits articles ne sera poursuivi en justice, ou aucunement mo∣lesté à la requisition de qui que ce soit pour aucunes transgressions des loxi pour aucun enlevement ou saisies d'armes, de chevaux, d'argent, de hardes, meubles ou marchandises, provisions par eux faites durant la guerre; ny sera aucun de ceux qui sont compris dans le second ou troi∣siême Article, assigné cité en droit, ou rendu responsable des rentes usufruits, & possessions d'aucunes terres, biens en fonds ou maisons par eux on aucun d'eux receues ou saisies depuis le commence∣ment de la presente Guerre jusques au jour de la datte des presens, ni d'aucun degat, deperissement ou desordre par eux ou aucun d'eux commis: Il est aussi sti∣pulé que cet Article sera mutuel & re∣ciproque aux deux parties.
ART. VII. Tout Seigneur et gentilhomme com∣pris dans le second & troisiême Arti∣cles cy dessus auront la liberté d'aller par tout avec l'épée & une paire de Pistolets, & d'avoir un fusil chez eux, soit pour la deffense de leurs maisons, ou pour la chasse. ART. VIII. Il sera permis à tous les habitans & autres qui resident à Limerick ou dans les autres Garnisons d'emporter leurs biens, meubles, hardes & provisions sans être visitez ou fouillez, & sans payer aucuns droits, & ne seront tenus a quitter les maisons ou logis qu'ils occu∣pent actuellement de six semaines, à compter de la datte du present Trai∣té. ART. IX. Le serment que l'on fera prêter aux Catholique-Romains, qui se soumet∣tront au government de leurs Majestez Regnantes, sera celuy cy dessus specifié & point d'autre. ART. X. Si quelqu'un contrevient aux presens Articles, ou à quelqu'un d'iceux, il n'excluera pas par la, aucune autre per∣sonne des avantages y portez.
ART. XI. Les Lords Justiciers & le General promettent de faire tout leur possible pour que toutes les personnes comprises dans les Articles cy dessus, soient pro∣tegées & mises à couvert contre tout arret ponrsuites, ou executions pour det∣tes ou dommages, durant huit mois a∣prés la datte des presens. ART. XII. Les Lords Justiciers & le General s'engagent que leurs Majestez ratifieront ces presens Articles dans huit mois d'icy, ou même plutôt, & feront de leur mieux pour qu'ils soient aussi ratifiez & confirmez en Parlement. ART. XIII. Finalement, Comme le Colonel Jean Brown se trouva endetté à plusieurs protestans par jugements enregistrez; & que le dernier gouvernement en etant in∣formé, les Lords Tyrconnel & Lucan enleverent les effets que le dit Jean Brown avoit pour payer ses dites det∣tes, dont ils promirent de le faire de∣charger, & ces effets furent employez à l'usage & au service commun des Irlandois & de leur armée: Pour exempter donc le dit Lord Lucan de son dit engagement contracté pour leur cause commune, comme aussi pour sa∣tisfaire
les dits protestans & empêcher la ruine du dit Jean Brown, & con∣tenter ses creanciers, nous sommes con∣venus à l'instance du dit Lord Lucan, & des autres personnes cy dessus men∣tionneés que les dits Lords Justiciers, & le dit Baron Ginckle intercederont auprès du Roy & du Parlement pour conserver par Articles & capitulation aux Catholiques-Romains dans ce Royaume lenr biens meubles & immeu∣bles, chargez & egalement affectez au payement des dites dettes jusqu'a la concurrence de ce que valoient les dits effets enlevez au dit Jean Brown, sui∣vant le certificat qu'en donnera par e∣crit signé de lny le dit Lord Lucan après avoir compté avec le dit Jean Brown; le dit Compte sera dressé & la balance d'iceluy certifié par le dit Lord Lucan dans vingt & un jours de la date des presens. Pour l'accomplissement de tout ce qui dessus est nous avons signe, Presens, Scravemore. H. Maccay. T. Talmash. Char. Porter Tho. Coningsby. Bar. De Ginckle.
ET comme la dit Ville de Limerick Nous à eté livrée dépuis, suivant les dits Articles, Scavoir Faisons que Nous ayant consideré les dits Articles avons bien voulu declarer par ces presentes, que Nous Ratifions et Confirmons, tant pour Nous que pour Nos Heretiers et Successeurs, autant que de Nous depend, les dits Articles & chaque clause & condition y portées. Et quant a ce qui requiert un Acte confirmatif du Parlement, Nous en recommanderons l'accomplisse∣ment au dit Parlement & donnerons Nôtre Agréement & Approbation à tout Acte ou Actes qui passeront à ce sujet dans les deux chambres de Nôtre Parlement: & Comme il nous paroit que les parties stipulantes sont con∣venues qu'après les mots Limerick, Clare, Kerry, Cork, Mayo, ou aucun d'iceux specifiéz au deuxieme Article, les mots suivans, scavoir, [& tous ceux qui sont sous leurs protections dans les dites Comtés] dussent etre inserez & faire partie des dits Articles. Lesquels mots ayant eté omis casuellement par l'écrivain, l'omission n'en a pas été apper∣cue qu'après que les dits Articles furent signez, mais on s'en apperceut avant qu'on eut livré la seconde Ville; & comme Nos dits Justiciers & General ou l'un d'eux, ont promis que la dite clause auroit lieu ainsi qu'etoit l'inten∣tion des parties stipulantes, & qu'elle étoit de meme inserée dans le brouillon de la capitulation, Nôtre plaisir, de plus, est, & par ces presentes Nous Ratifions & Confirmons les dits mots omis, scavoir, [et tous ceux qui sont sous leurs protections dans les dites
Comtés,] declarant & ordonnant par ces presentes tant pour Nous que pour Nos Heritiers & Successeurs que toutes les personnes comprises dans les dites clauses & conventions auront, recevront & jouiront des avantages d'i∣celles, ainsi & de la même maniere qu'elles l'auroient fait, si les dits mots eussent été inserés dans leur propre place, au dit second Article; & ce nonobstant toute omission defaut ou inadvertence à trouver dans le dit deuxiême Article à la charge toujours, et Nôtre volonté & plaisir est, que Nos presentes Lettres Pa∣tentes soient enregistrées dans Nôtre Cour de Chancellerie de Nôtre dit Royaume d'Irlande dans un an, du jour de la date des presentes. En foy de quoy, &c. Te∣moins Nous memes à Westminster le vingt quatrieme jour de Fevrier, Anno Reg∣ni Regis & Reginae Gulielmi & Mariae Quarto per Breve de Privato Sigillo. Nos autem Tenorem Premissor. predict. Ad requisitionem Attornat. General. Domini Regis & Dominae Reginae pro Regn. Hiberniae duximus exemplificand. per Praesentes. In cujus Rei Testimo∣nium Has Literas Nostras Fieri Fecimus Patentes. Testibus Nobis Ipsis apud Westmon. Quinto die Aprilis, Anno{que} Regni Eorum Quarto. BRIDGES. Examinat. per nos S. Keck. Lacon Wm. Childe In Cancel. Magistros.
LES ARTICLES MILITAIRES De Capitulation signés Entre le Baron de Ginckle, Lieute∣nant General, & Commandant en chef de l'armée Angloise d'un coté. ET Les Lieutenants Generaux D'Ussoon et de Tessé Commandants en chef de l'armée Irlandoise, de l'autre coté, Avec les Officiers Generaux qui sous-Signerent. ART. I. QUE toute personne sans aucune exception, de quelque qualité ou con∣dition, quelles soient, qui voudront quitter le Royaume d'Irlande, auront la liberté, de passer la mer, dans quels pais ils jugeront a propos, (l'Angleterre et l'Ecosse exceptées) avec leurs fa∣milles meubles, vaisselle d'argent, et joyaux.
ART. II. Que tous les Officiers Generaux, Co∣lonels, et generalement tout autre Offi∣cier de Cavalerie, Dragons, Gardes a pié, Cavaliers, Dragons, Soldats, tels qu'ils puissent être; dans quelque Gar∣nison, place, ou lieu, dont les Irlandois sont actuellement en possession, ou cam∣pez dans les Comtez de Cork, Clare et Kerry, aussi bien que ceux qu'on appelle Raparées ou Voluntaires, qui voudront passer la mer (comme cy dessus) auront la liberté de s'embarquer sur les vais∣seaux designez, a les porter, d'aller tous en corps, comme ils sont presentement composez ou en parties, ou par compag∣nies, ou autrement, sans aucun em∣pechement directement ou indirectement. ART. III. Que toutes les personnes susdites, qui voudront sortir du Royaume d'Irlande, pour passer en France, auront permis∣sion de le declarer aux têms et lieux cy dessous marquez c'est a dire: Les troupes dans Limerick le mardy pro∣chain, a Limerick. La Cavalerie dans le camp le Mercredy. Et les autres troupes qui sont disperseés, dans les Com∣tés de Clare, Kerry et Cork, le huitieme jour du present mois (et point d'autre) devant Monsieur Tameron, l'Intendant Francois, et Colonel Withers, et aprés que cette declaration sera faite, les troupes qui doivent passer en France, seront sous le commandment, et la dis∣cipline des Officiers qui doivent les con∣duire là. Et les deserteurs de chaque
coté seront rendus, et punis conformé∣ment. ART. IV. Que tous les officiers tant Anglois qu'Ecossois, qui servent presentement en Irlande, seront compris dans cette Capitulation, tant par rapport a la seurté de leurs terres et biens, en An∣gleterre, Ecosse, et Irlande, (s'ils veu∣lent rester icy) que pour passer librement en France, ou dans aucun autre pais pour servir. ART. V. Que tous les officiers Generaux Fran∣cois, l'Intendant, les Ingenieurs, les Commissaires de Guerre, et d'Artillerie, le Tresorier, et autres Officiers Fran∣cois, Etrangers, et tous les autres tels qu'ils puissent être qui sont dans Sligo, Ross, Clare, ou dans l'armée, ou qui ne∣gocient ou trafiquent ou sont autrement employez dans aucune condition, auront la permission d'aller en France ou ailleurs, et de s'embarquer avec leurs chevaux, equipages, vaisselle d'argent, papiers, et effets de telle nature qu'ils puissent être: et que le General Ginckle leur four∣nira des passeports, des êscortes, et des voitûres tant par eau, que par terre, pour les mener saufs de Limerick, jusqu'aux Vaisseaux, ou ils se∣ront embarqués, sans payer aucune chose, pour les dites voitûres, ni a ceux qui y seront employés, avec leurs Che∣vaux, Charettes, Batteaux, et Chaloupes.
ART. VI. Que s'il y a aucun desdits Equi∣pages, Marchandises, Chevaux, Argent, Vaisselle d'argent, ou autres Hardes, ou ustensils, appartenants tant audites Troupes Irlandoises, qu'aux Officiers Francois, ou autres particuliers, tels qu'il, puissent être, pillé, detruit ou pris par les Troupes du susdit General: Ledit General ordonnera de le restituer, ou de le faire payer, selon l'estimation, qui en sera faite par Serment de ceux qui auront eté pillez ou volez. Et les dites Troupes Irlandoises, qui doivent passer la mer, et toutes autres person∣nes qui leur appartiennent, seront obli∣geés d'observer le bon ordre sur la roûte, et dans leurs quartiers, et de ren∣dre tout ce qu'ils prendront injustement des habitans ou d'en faire restitution. ART. VII. Que pour faciliter l'embarquement des dites Troupes, le General fournira 50 Vaisseaux du port de 200 tonneaux cha∣cun, sans que les personnes qui doivent etre transportées, soient obligées de payer aucune chose: et 20 Vaisseaux de plus, en cas de besoin, sans aucun payement; et en cas qu'il y en ait quelques'uns de ces Vaisseaux de moindre charge, Il en fournira un plus grand nombre, pour suppleer au defaut, et aussi deux Vais∣seaux de Guerre pour embarquer les Offi∣ciers Principaux, et servir de convoye aux autres Vaisseaux de port.
ART. VIII. Qu'un Commissaire sera immediate∣ment envoyé a Cork, pour visiter les Vaisseaux de transport, et en quel êtat ils sont, pour mettre a la voile; et aus∣sitôt qu'ils seront prêts, les troupes qui doivent partir, marcheront avec toute la diligence necessaire, par les chemins les plus courts, pour s'y embarquer. Et en eas qu'il se trouve plus d'hom∣mes a transporter, qui ne peuvent trouver place dans les dits 50 Vaisseaux, le reste quittera la ville Angloise de Lime∣rick, et marchera aux quartiers designez propres pour leur embarquement, ou ils resteront jusqu'a ce que les autres vingt Vaisseaux soient prêts, qui sera dans l'espace d'un mois, et peûvent s'embar∣quer, sur quelque vaisseau Francois qui peut venir en attendant. ART. IX. Que les dits Vaisseaux seront pour∣vûs, de fourage pour les chevaux et de tous les vivres necessaires, pour la subsistance des Officiers, Cavaliers, Dra∣gons, Soldats, et toutes autres personnes qui seront embarqueés, pour aller en France pour lesquels vivres on payera, apres que le tout aura eté debarqué soit a Brest, Nantes, sur les côtes de Bretagne ou en aucun autre Port de France qu'ils toucheront. ART. X. Et pour la seûreté du retour de ces vaisseaux (les dangers de la mer excep∣tez)
et le payment des vivres, on laissera des ôtâges suffisans. ART. XI. Que les garnisons de Clare-Castle, Ross, et toutes les autres troupes d'In∣fanterie, qui sont en garnison, dans les Comtez de Clare, Cork, et Kerry, se∣ront comprises dans la presente Capitula∣tion, et celles qui voudront passer la mer en sortiront, avec leurs Armes, Baggage, Bale en bouche, Mêche allumée par les deux bouts, Tambours battans, Enseignes deployées, avec toutes les provisions, et la moitié des munitions de guerre, qui peuvent etre dans ladite garnison, et joindront la Cavalerie en marche, pour s'embarquer: ou s'il n'y a pas des vais∣seaux suffisament, pour le corps d'In∣fanterie, qui doit partir le premier, apres la Cavalerie, le General Ginckle, leur fera fournir des voitûres necessaires pour cela, comme aussi les vivres dont its aûront besoin pour leur subsistance, pendant le tems, qu'ils seront en che∣min, en payant ces vivres; ou autrement, ils pourront les prendre de leurs pro∣pres Magasins. ART. XII. Que toute la Cavalerie, et les Dragons qui sont dans les comtez de Cork, Clare, et Kerry, seront aussi compris dans cette Capitulation, et qu'a ceux qui passeront en France, on donnera des quartiers (dans les Comtez de Clare, et Kerry) separez des troupes du General Ginckle jusqu'a leur embarquement, a condition, qu'ils payeront ce qu'on leur fournira, a la
resêrve du fourrage, et la pature de leurs chevaux qu'ils auront gratis. ART. XIII. Ceux de la Garnison de Sligo, qui sont joints a l'Armée Irlandoise jouiront pa∣reillement de cette Capitulation, et l'on enverra ordre a ceux qui doivent les escor∣ter, de les amener a Limerick par le plus court chemin. ART. XIV. Les Irlandois auront permission, d'em∣barquer 900 chevaux, ceux des Officiers y compris, qui seront transportez gra∣tis, et a l'egard des Cavaliers qui reste∣ront en arriere, il leur sera permis, de disposer d'eux mêmes, comme ils vou∣dront; a condition qu'ils rendent leurs chevaux, et leurs armes a ceux que le General nommera. ART. XV. Il sera permis a ceux, qui seront etablis pour prendre soin de la subsist∣ance des Cavaliers, qui veulent passer en France, d'acheter du Foin et de l'A∣voine aux prix du Roy, ou ils en pour∣ront trouver, dans les quartiers qui leur sont assignez, sans etre Empechez ou moles∣ez; et de tirer de la Ville de Limerick tou∣tes les Provisions necessaires: et pour cet effet le General leur fournira les voitures propres aux lieux, ou ils seront embar∣quez.
ART. XVI. Il sera aussi permis, qu'on se serve du Foin, qui est dans les Magazins du Comté de Kerry, pour les chevaux, qui seront embarquez; et s'il n'y en a pas suffisamment, il sera permis d'acheter du Foin, et de l'Avoine ou on en trou∣vera, aux prix du Roy. ART. XVII. Que tous les Prisonniers de Guerre, qui etoient en Irlande le 28 de Sep∣tembre, seront mis en liberté, de part et d'autre; et le General promet d'user de ses efforts pour faire pareille∣ment mettre en liberté ceux, qui sont en Angleterre et en Flandres. ART. XVIII. Que le General fera fournir des pro∣visions et des medicamens aux Officiers, Cavaliers, Dragons et Soldats de l'armee Irlandoise malades et blessez; qui ne pourront pas passer en France au pre∣mier embarquement; et apres qu'ils se∣ront gueris; il leur ordonnera des Vais∣seaux pour passer en France s'ils y veulent aller. ART. XIX. Qu'en signant la presente Capitulation le General enverra un vaisseau exprés en France; et qu'outre cela, il fourni∣ra deux Vaisseaux de ceux, qui sont á present dans la riviere de Limerick, pour transporter en France deux per∣sonnes, que l'on doit y envoyer, pour y
donner, avis du present traité; et que ceux qui commandent les dits vaisseaux, auront ordre de débarquer au premier port de la France ou ils seront portez. ART. XX. Que tous ceux des dites Troupes Offi∣ciers, et autres de quelque caractere qu'ils soient, qui voudront passer en France, n'en seront pas empechez, ni pour dettes ni aucun autre pretexte. ART. XXI. Si aprés la signature du present Traité, et avant l'arrivée de la flote, il arrive une corvete Francoile, ou autre Vaisseau de transport de France en aucun autre endroit d'Irlande, le General or∣donnera des passe-ports, non seulement pour ceux, qui doivent etre embarqués sur les dits vaisseaux, mais aussi pour les vaisseaux, pour venir au port le plus proche du lieu, ou les troupes, que l'on doit transporter seront en quartiers. ART. XXII. Qu'apres l'arrivée de la dite flote il y aura une communication libre, et pas∣sage entre elle et les quartiers des sus∣dites troupes; et sur tout pour tous ceux, qui ont des passe-ports des commandans en chef de la dite flote, ou de Monsieur Tameron l'intendant. ART. XXIII. En consideration du present Traité, les deux villes de Limerick, seront ce∣deés,
et mises entre les mains du Gene∣ral, ou d'aucune autre personne, qu'il etablira, au tems et aux jours cy apres specifiez, a savoir la ville Irlandoise, les magasins et l'hopital exceptez, le jour de la signature des presens Articles, et quant a la ville Angloise, avec l'isle, et le passage libre du pont de Thomond, elle demeurera dans la possession de ceux de l'armee Irlandoise, qui sout á pre∣sent dans la garnison, ou qui viendront des Comtés de Cork, Clare, Kerry, Sligoe, et des autres lieux dont on a fait mention, jusqu'a ce qu'on ait trouvé les choses propres pour leur transporta∣tion. ART. XXIV. Et pour prevenir tout desordre, qui puisse arriver entre la garnison, que le General mettra dans la ville Irlandoise, qui lni sera cedée, et les cavaliers Ir∣landois qui resteront dans la ville An∣glosse, et dans l'isle, ce qu'ils pourront faire, jusqu'a ce que les troupes, qui doivent etre embarquées sur les premiers 50 vaisseaux, soient parties pour la France et pas plus long tems, ils se retrancherons de part et d'autre, pour empecher la communication des dites gar∣nisons: et il sera defendu de part et d'au∣tre d'offrir aucune chose qui soit offens∣ante et les parties coupables d'aucune offense seront punies de part et d'autre. ART. XXV. Qu'il sera permis a la dite garnison de sortir tout d'un coup, ou a plusieurs fois, selon qu'elle pourra etre embarquée,
avec armes et baggage, tambours bat∣tant, meche allumée par les deux bouts, bale en bouche, enseignes deployeés, six pieces de Canon de fonte au choix des assiegez, deux mortiers, et la moitié de toutes les munitions de guerre, qui sont a present dans les magasins de la dite place: et pour cet effet on fera un in∣ventaire de toutes les munitions de guerre de la garnison en presence d'aucune per∣sonne que le General nommera le lende∣main de la signature du present accord. ART. XXVI. Tous les magasins des vivres resteront entre les mains des personnes, qui en sont a present chargées, pour faire sub∣sister ceux de l'armée Irlandoise, qui voudront passer en France; et s'il n'y en a pas suffisamment dans les magasins pour la subsistance des dites troupes, pendant leur sejour dans ce Royaume, et qu'ils passent la mer, qu'en donnant une memoire de leur nombre, le General leur en fournira suffisamment au prix Royal et qu'il y anra un marché libre a Limerick, et dans les autres quar∣tiers, ou les dites troupes seront: et en cas qu'aucuns vivres se trouvent dans les magasins de Limerick, quand la ville sera renduë, on en fera l'estimation, et le prix sera deduit de ce, que l'on doit payer pour les vivres, qu'on doit four∣nir aux troupes á bord des vaisseaux.
ART. XXVII. Qu'il y aura une cessation d'armes tant par terre, que par mer, par ra∣port qux vaisseaux Anglois, Hollan∣dois ou Francois destinés a transporter les dites troupes, jusqú a ce qu'ils retourne∣ront a leurs ports respectifs: et qu'on leur fourn ra de part et d'autre des pasleports, sufficiens tant pour les vaisseaux, que pour les hommes: et s'il arrive, qu'il soit con∣trevenu par quelque Commandant ou Ca∣pitaine de vaisseau, Officier, Cavalier, Dragon, Soldat ou autre personne a cette cessation d'armes; la personne coupable se∣ra punie de part et d'autre et les domma∣ges ou torts reparez; et des Officiers seront envoiés a l'embouchure de la Riviere de Limerick pour donner avis aux Com∣mandans des flotes Angloise et Fran∣coise de la presente situation, afin qu'ils observent aussi la Cessation d'armes. ART. XXVIII. Que pour la seureté de l'execution du present traité, et de chaque Article y contenu, les assiegez donneront les ota∣ges suivans — et le General don∣nera —. ART. XIX. Si avant l'execution entiere du dit traité, il arrive quelque changement dans le Gouvernement, ou dans le com∣mandement
ARTICULI CIVILES et MILITARES Civitatis LIMERICI, Conclusi Die tertia Octobris, Anno Domini, 1691. Inter Carolum Porter Equitem, & Thomam Coningsby Armigerum Dominos Justitiarios Hiberniae, Et Excellentiam suam Baronem de Ginckle Exercitus Anglicani Im∣peratorem ex una parte. ET Veré Honorabiles Patricium Comi∣tem de Lucan, Pierceium Vice Comitem de Galmoy, Colonel∣lum Nicolaum Purcel, Colonel∣lum Nicolaum Cusack, Tobiam Butler Equitem, Colonellum Gerardum Dillon, & Colonellum Joannem Brown, Et Suas Excellentias Vice-Impera∣tores D'Ussoon et De Tessé, Exercitus Hibernici Imperatores ex alterâ parte. Unà cum eorundem Articulorum ratificatione a suis Majestatibus Gulielmo Rege, & Maria Regina sub magno Angliae Sigillo.
GULIELMUS & Maria Det Gratia, Angliae, Scotiae, Fran∣ciae & Hiberniae Rex & Regi∣na, Fidei Defensores, &c. Omnibus ad quos Praesentes literae nostrae per∣venerint, salutem: Inspeximus Irro∣tulament quarund. literarum paten∣tium de confirmatione geren. Dat. apud Westmonasterium vicesimo quar∣to die Februarii, ultimi Praeteriti in Cancellar. nostr. Irrotulat. ac ibi∣dem de Recordo remanen. in haec verba. GULIELMUS & Maria Dei Gratia, &c. Omnibus ad quos Prae∣sentes literae nostrae pervenerint, sa∣lutem: Quandoquidem Quidam Articuli, dati die tertio Octobris ulti∣mi Praeteriti, facti & conclusi inter nostros Justitiarios Regni no∣stri Hiberniae, & nostrum Imperatorem nostri ibidem Exercitûs ex una parte, et Plures Officiales ibi intra civita∣tem Limericum in dicto nostro regno Gubernantes, ex alterâ parte, Quibus nostri dicti Justitiarii & Imperator se obligaverunt, quod nos eosdem Articulos infra spatium octo Men∣sium, vel citius Ratificaremus, et etiam quod totis suis viribus cona∣rentur ut iidem Articuli in Parlia∣mento Ratificarentur & Confirma∣rentur. Tenor autem eorum Articu∣lorum est, ut sequitur,
In Consideratione Deditionis Civitatis Limerici, & aliorum Pactorum in∣ter dictum Vice-Imperatorem Ginckle Civitatis Limerici Gubernatorem; et Exercitus Hibernici Imperatores in∣itorum et datorum eodem die quo prae∣sentes Pro Deditione dictae Civitatis, & Submissione dicti Exercitus, con∣cluditur, Quod, ART. I. ROMANO-Catholici hujus Regni in Exercitio suae Reli∣gionis fruentur talibus Privile∣giis, quae legibus Hiberniae non repug∣nant, vel qualibus fruebantur Rege Ca∣rolo secundo regnante: Et suae Ma∣jestates, cum primum sua Negotia eis permiserint Parliamentum convocare, dictis Romano Catholicis talem ulterio∣rem Securitatem in eo particulari procurare conabuntur, quae eosdem ab ullâ molestiâ ob dictam Religionem servare poterit. ART. II. Omnes Incolae, vel Commorantes Limerici, vel ullius alterius Praesidii nunc in possessione Hibernorum, & omnes Officiales & Milites nunc militantes sub ullâ Commissione Re∣gis Jacobi, aut illorum, qui ad eam concedendam ab illo Authorita∣tem habent in Comitatibus Limerici, Clare, Kerry, Cork et Mayo, vel in ullo ex ipsis, et Omnes Officiales Commissio∣nem
habentes in suarum Majestatum Stationibus, qui pertinent ad Hiber∣norum legiones nunc existentes, quibuscum tractatur, et qui non sunt Captivi bellici, vel qui Protectionem acceptaverunt, et qui redibunt, et suarum Majestatum Obedientiae se submittent; ET OMNES ET SIN∣GULI EORUM HAEREDES tene∣bunt, possidebunt et potientur Omnibus & Singulis eorum Terris, Feudis, Haere∣ditatibus, Juribus, Titulis, Possessioni∣bus, Privilegiis & Immunitatibus, quae ipsi et eorum omnes, vel singuli tene∣bant potiebantur, vel quibus justè & de jure erant intitulati Rege Carolo secun∣do regnante, vel ullo tempore ex eo, juxta leges & Statuta quae eodem Caro∣lo secundo regnante fuerunt in vigore, et de Mandato gubernantium mitten∣tur in possessionem eorum quae sunt in manibus Regis, vel in manibus Feu∣datariorum ejus, absque ullâ lite aut Molestiâ; Et omnes tales terrae erunt liberae et exoneratae omni vecti∣gali regio et aliis oneribus publicis contractis et debitis a festo S. Michaelis 1688 usque ad diem quo hi dati sunt. Et omnes Personae in hoc Articulo comprehensae habebunt, tenebunt, et potientur omnibus suis bonis et Ca∣tallis realibus et personalibus ad ipsas vel ad ullam earum pertinentibus, et remanentibus vel in propriis ea∣rum manibus vel in manibus cujus∣cunque alterius personae per modum Fideicommissi, vel pro usu earum, vel ullius ex ipsis: ET OMNES ET SINGULAE PRAEDICTAE PER∣SONAE CUJUSCUNQUE PRO∣FESSIONIS, ARTIS AUT VOCATIONIS SINT, poterunt uti, exercere et versari in suis variis respectivé Professionibus, Ar∣tibus,
et Vocationibus aeque libere ac in iis versabantur, eas exercebant et iis fruebantur sub regno Caroli secundi Regis. Salvo tamen, quod nihil in hoc articulo contentum intelligatur ex∣tendi ad restaurandam ullam perso∣nam exlegem nunc extra hoc Reg∣num, exceptis hisee posthac com∣prehendendis. Salvo etiam, quod nulla persona quaecunque habeat, aut gaudeat hujus Articuli beneficio, quae negliget aut recusabit praestare Juramentum autem Fidelitatis per hunc Articulum exigendum tale est. EGO A. B. sincerè promitto et Juro quod Fidelis ero, & veram Allegi∣anciam praestabo Regi Gulielmo, et Reginae Mariae. Sic me Deus adjuvet. Juramentum Fidelitatis a Parliamen∣to in Angliâ conditum anno primo regni Regis & Reginae jam regnan∣tium cum ab ipsis exigi contigerit. ART. III. Omnes mercatores, vel reputati mercatores civitatis Limerici, vel ul∣lius alterius praesidii nunc ab Hiber∣nis possessi, vel ullius oppidi aut loci in comitatibus de Clare vel Kerry, qui in partibus transmarinis absunt, & non militarunt a publicatione de∣claration is suarum majestatum mense Februarii 1688, hujus secundi articuli beneficio gaudebunt, eodem modo ac si praesentes adfuissent, modo ta∣men quod tales mercatores, et repu∣tati mercatores, intra spatium octo mensium a die quo praesentes dati sunt ad hoc regnum revertantur.
ART. IV. Sequentes officiales, viz. Simon Lutterell, tribunus militum, Roulan∣dus White praefectus, Mauritius Eu∣stace ex Yermanstown, Chievers ex Maystown, vulgo Mount-Leinster nunc praepositi legionibus in supra∣dictis praesidiis, et stationibus exercitus Hibernici, qui in partibus transmarinis sunt, et eo missi de ne∣gotiis ad suas legiones, vel ad totum exercitum spectantibus, secundi ar∣ticuli beneficio fruentur, modo huc intra spatium novem mensium a die. quo praesentes dati sunt redeant, se∣se{que} suarum majestatum legibus sub∣jiciant, dictumq juramentum prae∣stent. ART. V. Quod omnes et singulae praedictae personae secundo et tertio articulis comprehensae, accipient condonatio∣nem generalem omnium condemna∣tionum, proscriptionum, proditio∣num, proditionis deferendae neglec∣tuum, confiscationum, furtorum, transgressionum, et aliorum criminum et malefactorum quorumcum{que} ab il∣lis vel a quavis illarum ab initio Regni Regis Jacobi secundi admissorum, et siqua illarum a parliamento sit pro∣scripta, Domini Justitiarii exerci∣tus{que} imperator totis viribus conabun∣tur, ut ejusmodi proscriptio abrogetur rescindatur{que} a proximo parliamento gratis, scribarum salario excepto.
ART. VI. Et cum praesens bellum magnas utri{que} parti concitarit violentias, et si privatas lites qualescun{que} intentare liceret, simultates producerentur, quae diutius duraverunt, publicae{que} dis∣cordiae protraherentur: ad pacandas igitur res{que} Regni componendas, ca∣lamitates{que} contrarium necessario con∣secuturas, declinandas; nulla perso∣na, aut personae quaecum{que} praece∣dentibus articulis comprehensae in jus trahentur, moiestabuntur, aut in jus ullius partis aut partium postu∣latione vocabuntur, ob ullam trans∣gressionem ab illis commissam, vel ob ulla arma, equos, pecuniam, bo∣na, catallas, merces, aut provisiones quascum{que} ab illis durante bello capta aut occupata: et nulla persona aut personae quaecum{que} secundo et tertio articulis comprehensae in jus rapien∣tur, aut reae agentur aut rationem reddere tenebuntur ullius reditûs, aut proventus cujusvis terrae, fundi, aut domorum ab ipsa aut ipsis receptorum, aut possessorum in hoc regno ab initio praesentis belli ad diem quo hi arti∣culi dati sunt, ne{que} ullius devastatio∣nis, aut transgressionis ab illa aut illis commissarum: et concluditur quod hic articulus sit utri{que} parti mutuus et reciprocus.
ART. VII. Omnes nobiles et generosi, praedic∣tis secundo et tertio Articulis com∣prehensi habebunt libertatem equi∣tandi cum gladio et pari Scloppetu∣lorum si ipsis visum fuerit, et habendi Scloppet um in aedibus suis pro de∣fensione earundem, vel pro venatione. ART. VIII. Omnibus incolis commorantibus{que} Limerici, aut in aliis praesidiis, licebit amovere indé sua bona, catallas et provisiones sine inspectione, scruta∣tione aut vectigalium solutione: nec ex aedibus suis aut hospitiis quae nunc occupant discedere cogentur, quoad sex hebdomades a die, quo praesentes dati sunt, effluxerint. ART. IX. Juramentum a Romano-Catholicis, qui sese suarum majestatum legibus subjecerint, exigendum, erit juramen∣tum praememoratum, et non aliud. ART. X. Nulla persona aut personae ullo tempore postmodum hos Articulos, vel illorum quemvis violantes, causa erunt, cur ulli personae aut personis illorum beneficium adimatur.
ART. XI. Domini Justitiarii et exercitus imperator pollicentur sese pro virili laboraturos, ut omnes, supradictis Articulis comprehensi protegantur tuti{que} praestentur ab omni manuum injectione, executione pro debitis aut injuria per spatium octo mensium diem, quo hi dati sunt, sequentium. ART. XII. Deni{que} Domini Justitiarii sese ob∣ligant suas majestates praesentes arti∣culos intra spatium octo abhinc men∣sium ratificaturas esse, immo vel ci∣tius; et quantum in illis situm est, operam daturas esse ut iidem a parlia∣mento ratificentur et confirmentur. ART. XIII. Demum quandoquidem tribunus militum Joannes Brown fuerit in aere multorum Protestantium judiciis in tabulas relatis quod cum dominis Regno nuper praepositis constaret, Dynastae Tyrconnel et Lucan abstule∣runt illi praefato Joanni Brown bo∣na, quae solvendis debitis asserva∣bat, quibus sese illum exoneraturos esse polliciti sunt, quae bona ad u∣sum communem Hibernorum illo∣rum{que} exercitus adhibita sunt; ad igitur eximendum Dynastam Lucan tum a dicta fidejussione illorum causâ
communi contractâ, tum etiam ad satisfaciendum dictis Protestanti∣bus, obviam{que} exitio praefati Joannis Brown eundum satis{que} creditoribus ejus faciendum; inter nos convênit postulatione praefati Domini Lucan, aliorum{que} supradictorum, ut praeme∣morati Domini Justitiarii, et Baron de Ginckle suâ utantur apud Regem et Parliamentum gratiâ, ut bona immo∣bilia Articulis et tractatu Romano-Ca∣tholicis conservata onerentur pariter{que} dictorum debitorum solutione affician∣tur tantum, quantum dicta bona prae∣fato Joanni Brown ab lata, valebant, se∣cundum literas certificatorias, quas manu suâ subscriptas dabit idem Do∣minus Lucan factâ ratione cum dicto Joanne Brown: quae ratio compone∣tur, cujus{que} differentiam dictus Do∣minus Lucan intra viginti dies et u∣num a die quo praesentes dati sunt testabitur. Ad veram horum articulorum per∣actionem propriis manibus subscrip∣simus Present, Scravemore. H. Maccay. T. Talmash. Car. Porter. Tho. Coningsby. Bar. De Ginckle.
ET cum dicta Urbs Limericensis No∣bis consequenter ad praefatos Ar∣ticulos dedita fuerit, Sit vobis no∣tum, Nos, perpensis dictis Articulis, benigne his declarare, quod Nos, pro Nobismetipsis Haeredibus et Successori∣bus Nostris quantum in Nobis situm est, Ratificamus et Confirmamus eosdem, et illorum unamquam{que} clausulam om∣nia{que} illis comprehensa. Quod autem ad tales partes illorum attinet, qua∣rum Ratificatio Parliamenti Decretum exiget, earum confirmationem perac∣tionem{que} Parliamento Commendabi∣mus, Regio{que} Nostro Assensu omne De∣cretum aut Decreta in eum finem utri∣us{que} Parliamenti conventûs Compro∣babimus; Cum{que} Nobis appareat, assen∣sum esse ab utra{que} parte dictis Articulis, quod post verba Limerick, Clare, Kerry, Cork, Mayo, vel illorum quodvis in secundo Articulo, verba sequentia viz. [omnesque illi qui sunt sub illorum in dic∣tis Comitatibus tutela:] inserenda es∣sent, pars{que} dictorum Articulorum esse deberent, quorum verborum casu a Scribâ omissorum, non est observa∣ta omissio, nisi post horum Articulo∣rum subscriptionem; verum animad∣versa est, ante secundae urbis de∣ditionem: Et quemadmodum dic∣ti Nostri Justitiarij, Imperator{que} vel illorum alteruter, promiserunt dictam clausulam perfectum iri juxta sensum mentem{que} tractatus, et inserta fuit rudi ejusdem exemplari: ulterior Nostra voluntas et beneplacitum est, et his Ratificamus et Confirmamus dicta omissa verba viz. [omnesque illi qui sub illorum in dictis Comitatibus tutela sunt]
pro nobis, nostris haeredibus et suc∣cessoribus, jubentes, declarantes{que} unamquam{que} personam, et personas illis comprehensas habituras esse, posse habere, recipere et illorum frui benefi∣cio tali, et eodem modo, ac si verba praefata proprio loco inserta fuissent in dicto secundo articulo, nulla omis∣sione, defectu aut errore, in dicto secundo articulo obstantibus, modo semper, nostra{que} voluntas et bene∣placitum est, ut hae literae nostrae pa∣tentes in Cancellariae nostrae acta referantur in dicto nostro Hi∣berniae Regno intra spatium unius an∣ni proximé sequentis. In testimonium, &c. teste sigillo nostro vigesimo quarto die Februarii apud Westmonasterium, Anno Regni Regis Gulielmi, et Reginae Mariae quarto per breve de privato Sigillo. Nos autem Tenorem Premissor. Praedict. Ad Requisitionem Attornat. General. Do∣mini Regis & Dominae Reginae pro Reg∣no Hiberniae. duximus exemplificand. per Praesentes. In cujus Rei Testimo∣nium has literas nostras fieri fecimus Patentes. Testibus nobis ipsis apud Westmon. Quinto die Aprilis, Anno{que} Regni eorum Quarto. BRIDGES. Examinat. per nos S. Keck Lacon Wm. Childe In Cancel. Magistros.
ARTICULI MILITARES De quibus Conventum est Inter Baronem de Ginckle Vice-Imperatorem, Anglorum Exerci∣tus Imperatorem ex una parte. ET Vice-Imperatores D'Ussoon et De Tessé, Hibernorum Exercitus Im∣peratores ex alterâ parte, offici∣ales{que} Generales his Articulis Subscribentes. ART. I. QUOD omnes personae, sine ullâ exceptione cujuscum{que} ordi∣nis aut conditionis quae volent ex Hiberniae Regno discedere, habebunt libertatem eundi ad quasvis par∣tes transmarinas (Anglia, Scotia{que} ex∣ceptis) cum suis familiis, suppellec∣tile, argento facto, gemmis{que}
ART. II. Quod omnes Officiales Generales, Colonelli, omnes{que} generaliter alij Officiales equitatus, equitum sclope∣tariorum, et peditatus, militum{que} de∣nique cujuscum{que} generis, qui sunt in ullo praesidio, loco, aut sta∣tione, nunc in possessione Hiberno∣rum, vel qui in Castris sunt in Comi∣tatibus Cork, Clare et Kerry, sicut etiam illi vocati Raptores, vel Vo∣luntarii, qui volunt ire ad partes transmarinas, ut supra, habebunt li∣bertatem conscendendi naves, ubi∣cum{que} illae sunt, quae illis transvectan∣dis destinantur, veniendi{que} collectivé, ut nunc sunt, vel divisim, cohortatim vel alio quovis modo, sine ullo impedimento, directé vel indirecté. ART. III. Quod omnes praefatae personae, quae volunt ex Hibernia in Galliam disce∣dere, habebunt licentiam id declarandi temporibus et locis infra dicendis, viz. Copiae Limerici, die Martis proximo Limerici; Equitatus, in castris suis die Mercurii; caeterae{que} Copiae dispersae in Comitatibus Clare, Kerry, et Cork, die octavo praesentis mensis, et nullo alio tempore, coram Domino Tame∣ron Intendente Gallico, et Colonello Withers; post{que} factam ejusmodi declarationem, Copiis in Galliam transituris remanendum erit sub im∣perio disciplina{que} suorum Officialium, qui illas eo ducturi sunt: et utrius{que}
exercitus transfugae mutuo reddentur at{que} conformiter punientur. ART. IV. Quod omnes Angli et Scoti Offi∣ciales militantes jam in Hibernia hoc Tractatu comprehendentur, tum quoad securitatem suarum terrarum bono∣rum{que} in Angliâ, Scotiâ et Hiberniâ (si hic remanere voluerint) tum quoad licentiam libere transeundi in Gal∣liam, aut aliam quamvis Regionem ad militandum. ART. V. Quod omnes Officiales Gallici Gene∣rales, Intendens, Machinatores, et Commissarii Belli et Tormentorum Bellicorum, Quaestor, et caeteri Gallici Officiales, Exteri, et omnes alii qui∣cunque, qui sunt Sligo, Ross aut Clare, vel in exercitu vel qui mer∣caturam faciunt aut negotiantur, vel versantur in alio quocum{que} statu aut conditione, poterunt liberrime transire in Galliam aut aliam quam∣vis Regionem; et poterunt naves con∣scendere cum omnibus suis Equis, Cul∣tu, Argento facto, Chartis et omnibus Bonis quibuscum{que}. Et Imperator Ginckle jubebit iis dari itineris symbola, praesidia, vecturas terrâ et aquâ; quibus vehantur tuti Limerico ad Naves, in quas imponentur, nec quidquam sol∣vent pro dictis vecturis, aut illis quo∣rum operâ utentur, cum equis, vehi∣culis, naviculis, et scaphis.
ART. VI. Quod si quidquam praefati Cultus, Mercium, Equorum, Pecuniae, Ar∣genti facti, aut aliorum Mobilium aut suppellectilis dictarum Hibernicarum Copiarum, vel aliorum Officialium Gallicorum, vel privatarum persona∣rum quarumcum{que} direptum fuerit, perditum, aut ablatum a Copiis dicti Imperatoris; id dictus Imperator aut jubebit restitui, aut pro eo solutio∣nem fieri, pro aestimatione illius ju∣ramento facta a personâ sic direptâ aut spoliatâ: et dictis Copiis Hiber∣nicis transportandis, ut supra, et omni∣bus aliis personis ad ipsas spectntibus bonus ordo observandus est in itinere et stationibus; omniaque reddent, quae incolis abstulerint, aut restitu∣tionem facient pro eisdem. ART. VII. Quod, ut facilius transvectentur dictae Copiae, Imperator suppeditabit quinquaginta Naves, singulas capaces ducentorum doliorum: pro quibus personae transvectandae nihil tene∣buntur solvere; imo viginti alias si opus fuerit, ne{que} pro iis quidquam solvent; quod si quaepiam dictarum Navium suerit tanti oneris incapax, plures numero Ille suppeditabit in compensationem: et etiam dabit duas Naves Bellicas, quas conscendent prae∣cipui Officiales, quae{que} erunt Navibus onerariis praesidio.
ART. VIII. Quod Commissarius quamprimum mittetur Corcagiam ad examinandas Naves transvectorias, videndum{que} quâ sint ad navigandum conditione; et quod, ubi primum paratae fuerint, Copiae transvectandae ibunt quam commodissima celeritate, brevissima viâ, ad illas conscendendas. Quod si major fuerit transvehendorum nume∣rus, quam ut praefatis quinquaginta Navibus vehatur, reliqui discedent ex urbe Anglica Limericensi in eas statio∣nes, quae illis assignabuntur commo∣dae illorum transvectationi; ubi re∣manebunt quoad caeterae viginti Na∣ves paratae sint, quae erunt intra men∣sem; et poterunt Navim quamcunque Gallicam conscendere quae interea ad∣ventare poterit. ART. IX. Quod dictis navibus suppeditabitur pabulum pro equis, et omnes necessa∣riae provisiones ad sustendandos Offi∣ciales, Copias, Draconarios, Milites, et caeteras personas quascum{que} quae in naves imponentur transvehendae in Galliam: pro quibus provisionibus pecunia numerabitur, ubi primum omnes ex navibus descenderint Bresti aut Nantibus, in littore mino∣ris Britanniae, vel in alio quocunque portu Galliae quem attingere poterunt. ART. X. Et ad praestandum securum reditum dictarum navium (maris periculo ex∣cepto)
et pecuniam pro dictis pro∣visionibus, obsides dabuntur. ART. XI. Quod Praesidia Clare-Castelli, Ross, caeteri{que} Pedites qui sunt in Praesidiis, in Comitatibus Clare, Cork et Kerry, fruentur beneficio hujus Tractatus; Qui{que} ex his Praesidiis statuunt ma∣ria transire, egredientur cum Armis, Sarcinis, pulsu Tympanorum, Glande plumbea in ore, cum Fomite ex u∣trâque extremitate accenso, Vexillis explicatis, cum omnibus Provisioni∣bus, dimidia{que} parte Apparatus bellici qui jam in dicto Praesidio est, sese{que} adjungent Equitatui qui erit in iti∣nere transvectandus; quod si tunc numerus navium non suffecerit Pedi∣tatui proximé transvehendo post E∣quitatum, Imperator Ginckle jubebit illis ad eam rem vecturas suppeditari; et quascum{que} opus habuerint provisi∣ones in itinere, modo pro iis solvant, vel ut ex suis eas Promptuariis sumant. ART. XII. Quod omnes Equitum et Draconario∣rum Turmae quae sunt in Comitati∣bus Cork, Kerry et Clare, fruentur be∣neficio hujus Tractatus; et quod iis, qui volunt transire in Galliam, stati∣ones dabuntur in comitatibus Clare et Kerry, seorsim a Copiis quibus im∣perator Ginckle praeest, quoad in naves imponantur: et intra stationes sol∣vent pro re qualibet, excepto pabulo,
equorum{que} pastu quae gratis suppe∣ditabuntur. ART. XIII. Illi de Praesidio Sligo qui junguntur Hibernorum exercitui, fruentur be∣neficio hujus Tractatus; et mandata mittentur ad eos, qui illis praesidio futuri sunt huc, ut eos Limericum bre∣vissima viâ ducant. ART. XIV. Hibernis licebit transvehere non∣gentos equos, inclusis Officialium equis, qui transvehentur gratis, et qui Equites remanent, disponent de se, ut voluerint, concessis equis armis{que} iis personis quas Imperator assignabit. ART. XV. Licebit iis ad quos deferetur cura sustentandorum Equitum qui in Gal∣liam transire volunt, emere Faenum Avenam{que} pretiis Regis, ubicum{que} invenerint, in stationibus illis assig∣natis sine ulla mora vel molestiâ; et ca∣pere quasvis provisiones necessarias ex Urbe Limerico: et ad hanc rem Impera∣tor suppeditabit iis commodas vectu∣ras ad ea loca, ubi in naves imponen∣tur.
ART. XVI. Licebit uti faeno, asservato in horreis in Comitatu Kerry pro equis qui in na∣ves imponentur; et si non suffecerit, licebit emere faenum et avenam, ubi∣cum{que} invenientur, pretiis Regis. ART. XVII. Quod omnes captivi bellici, qui fuerunt in Hibernia, vigesimo octavo Septembris, in libertatem restituentur utrim{que} et imperator pollicetur se usurum omni operâ, ut qui sunt in Anglia et Flandria, in libertatem quo{que} restituantur. ART. XVIII. Imperator provisiones, & medica∣menta aegrotis vulneratis{que} Officiali∣bus equitibus, draconariis militibus{que} exercitus Hibernici curabit suppeditan∣da, qui in primâ navium conscensi∣one in Galliam transire non poterunt, sanatis autem naves comparari jube∣bit, ad transeundum in Galliam, si tran∣sire voluerint. ART. XIX. Quod in horum subscriptione, im∣perator navim nunciam mittet in Galliam; suppeditabit{que} ex iis quae nunc in portu Limericensi sunt duas naves quae transvehant duos in Gal∣liam homines mittendos cum nuncio hujus tractatus, qui{que} his navibus
praesunt, iis imperabitur, ut exponant in littus, quos vehunt, in proxima Galliae parte, ad quam fuerint delatis. ART. XX. Quod quicum{que} ex dictis Copiis, Officialibus aliis{que} cujuscum{que} nomi∣nis, volent in Galliam transmittere, non impedientur causâ aeris alieni, aut alia de causa quacum{que} ART. XXI. Si post subscriptionem praesentis Trac∣tatus, et ante classis adventum, na∣vicula Gallica literarum bajula aut a∣lia navis transvectoria, ex Gallia in aliam quamvis Hiberniae partem ap∣pulerit: Imperator jubebit dari itine∣ris symbola, non solum dictas naves conscensuris, sed etiam navibus, ut appellant ad portum proximum lo∣co ubi copiae transvehendae in sta∣tione fuerunt. ART. XXII. Quod post adventum praefatae clas∣sis, liberum erit commercium liber{que} transitus, inter illam, stationes{que} dic∣tarum copiarum; et potissimum, om∣nibus, qui a supremis Officialibus dictae classis acceperunt salvi conductus dip∣lomata vel a domino Tameron, Inten∣dente. ART. XXIII. In considerationem praesentis trac∣tatus, duae urbes Limericenses deden∣tur,
tradentur{que} imperatori, vel alteri cuivis, quem statuerit, tempore, et diebus infra dicendis viz. urbs Hi∣bernica, exceptis cellis et nosocomio, die quo praesentes articuli subscriben∣tur: Urbs vero Anglica remanebit uná cum insulâ, libero{que} pontis Tho∣mondii transitu in manibus eorum ex∣ercitus Hibernici, qui nunc sunt in Praesidio vel qui posthac venerint ex comitatibus Cork, Clare, Kerry, Sligoe et aliis locis praedictis, quoad apta omnia illis transvehendis comparen∣tur. ART. XXIV. Et ad avertendos quosvis tumul∣tus inter praesidium ab Imperatore collocandum in urbe Hibernicâ quae illi tradetur, et Equites Hibernos in urbe Anglicâ remansuros, quod illis licebit, quoad copiae, in primas quin∣quaginta naves imponendae, In Gal∣liam profectae fuerint et non diutius; utrim{que} sese fossâ cingent, ad rescin∣dendum omne dictorum Presidiorum commercium: prohibebitur{que} utrim{que} nequa committatur offensa; qui autem commiserint ex alterutra parte, puni∣entur. ART. XXV. Quod licebit dicto praesidio vel eodem tempore collective, vel diver∣sis temporibus exire, ut in naves im∣poni
possit, cum armis, sarcinis, so∣no tympanorum, fomite ad utram{que} extremitatem accenso, globulo plum∣beo in ore, passis vexillis, sex tor∣mentis aeneis, quae obsessi eligent, duobus pyrobolis et dimidia parte ap∣paratûs bellici, qui nunc in cellis est dictae urbis; quapropter fiet catalo∣gus omnis apparatus bellici Praesidii coram quovis ab imperatore statuen∣endo, postridie quam hi articuli sub∣scribentur. ART. XXVI. Omnes provisionum cellae rema∣nebunt in manibus illorum, qui cu∣ram gerunt illarum, in sustentatio∣nem illorum exercitus Hibernici, qui in Galliam transire volent: Et si non suerit satis in cellis ad sustentandas dictas copias, quamdiu manent in hoc regno, et Maria transeunt, quod redditâ numerorum ratione, Impera∣tor abunde provifionum suppedita∣bit pretiis Regis; et quod liber Merca∣tus erit Limerici, et in aliis Praesidijs ubi dictae copiae erunt: quod si quid provisionum remanferit in cellis Li∣mericensibus, urbe redditâ aestimabi∣tur, et pretium detrahetur de eo, quod solvendum est pro provisionibus sun∣peditandis copiis in navibus.
