E741DA [ocm]62369185 187881
A particular CHARGE OR IMPEACHMENT, in the name of His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, AND The Army under his Command. AGAINST Denzill HollisEsq; Sir Philip Stapleton. Sir William Lewis. Sir John Clotworthy. Sir William VValler. Sir John Maynard, Knights. Major Gen. Massey. John GlynnEsq; Recorder of London. VValter LongEsq; Col. Edward Harley. And Anthony NicollEsq; Members of the House of Commons. BY the appointment of His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and his Councell of VVarre. Signed, JOHN RUSHVVORTH. Secr. Imprinted at London, for George Whittington at the Blew Anchor in Cornehill neere the Royall Exchange. 1647.
July 8. 1647. THe Charge was presented to the House of Commons Tuesday the 6. of June by Col. Scroope, Col. Okey, Col. Hewson, Col. Pride, Lieutenant Col. Bowen, Lieutenant Col. Goffe, Major Rainsborow, Capt Berry, Capt. Clerke, Captaine Carter, Capt. Rolph, Mr. Saxby, and Mr. Gethings, who atten∣ding at the Parliament Door, were sent for in, and standing at the Barre Col. Scroope spake to this effect: That they were appointed by the Generall and the Army under his command to present to this Honourable House a particular Charge or Impeachment against severall Members thereof, viz. Mr. Hollis, Sir Philip Stapleton, Sir William Lewis. Sir John Clot∣worthy, Sir William Waller, Sir John Maynard, Knights, Major Generall Massey, John Glynn Recorder of London, Walter Long Esquire, Col. Edward Harley, and Anthony Nicoll Esquire; and that in the name of his Excellency and the Army they did here impeach the said Members of high Crimes and Mis∣demeanours; humbly tendering the same to this Honoura∣ble House. Which being done, the Speaker sent for the Charge by the Clerke of the House; the Officers being desired to withdraw, the Members impeached were sent for, and the Charge read in the House, but the debate thereupon was deferred till Thursday, at which time the Officers attended and sent in, and acquainted Mr. Speaker that they were at the doore for an answer, that so they might give an account to the Army; But other weighty matters taking up the day, the House sent to informe the Officers that they resolved the debate upon the Charge on Fryday July 9. at whiah time they are againe to attend the House.
A particular Charge or Impeachment, in the name o His Excellency Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX, and the Army under his Command: Against Denzill Holles, Esq; Sir Philip Stapleton, Sir Will. Lewis, Sir John Clotworthy, Sir Will. Waller, Sir John Maynard, Knights Maj. Gen. Massey, John GlynEsq; Recorder of London, Walter Long Esq; Col. Edw. Harley, and Anthony Nicholl, Esq; Members of the House of Commons. WHereas on the 15. day of June last, the heads of a Charge were delivered in the name of the said Army, unto the Courts of Parlia∣ment, to be sent up to the Parliament against the persons above named. Now in prosecu∣tion and maintenance thereof, and accor∣ding to the power thereby reserved, it is in the name of the said Army more particularly charged against the said persons as followeth: I. That the said Master Denzill Holles, during the late Warre, in prosecution of the evill designes expressed in the generall Heads or Articles formerly exhibited, contrary to the trust reposed in him, contrary to his Oath taken in June, 1643. and contrary to the Or∣dinance of Parliament dated in October, 1643. hath assisted the King in the late unnaturall Warre, and held correspondence and intelli∣gence with the Enemy against the Parliament, in manner following. viz, He the said Master Holles, being one of the speciall Commissio∣ners for the Parliament, to present Propositions of both Houses to the King at Oxford; did privately, and contrary to his Instru∣ctions, at severall times, make his addresses unto the Kings Party, there then in Armes against the Parliament namely, unto the Earle of Lindsey, the Earle of Southampton, the Lord Savill, and others; and did secretly plot and advise them against the Parliament; and did intimate unto them, or one of them, That the said Propositions then sent unto His Majesty by the Parliament were unreasonable: And the said Master Holles being demanded what answer he would advise the King to make to the said Propositions; he the said Master Holles did advise that the King should demand a Treaty however, and then declare how unreasonable the Propositions were and that yet, for the peace of the Kingdome, His Majesty would treat upon them; but withall wished the said Treaty might be in London, whither the King himself should come upon security. And he the said Master Holles, adding that there was nothing in the world that the violent party (meaning the well-affected party to the Parlia∣ment against the Enemy, did so much feare as his Majesties com∣ming to London, which would be a certaine dissolution of their Au∣thority
and Power: And the said Master Holles bad those said per∣sons, or one of them, assure the King that if His Majesty knew as much as he (the said Master Holles) knew, His Majesty would take his Horse and be at London the next day, or words to that effect. And it being againe demanded whether (if the King should be wil∣ling to come) it would be accepted of? he the said Mr. Holles there∣to answered, that certainly it would be much opposed, but yet he the said Mr Holles was confident, that he and his Party (meaning some of the Members above-named, and others) should carry it, and wished the King to put it upon that tryall. And the said Mr. Holles was desired by the said Earle of Lindsey, Earle of Southhampton and Lord Savill, or one of them, that he would be pleased to draw such an answer in writing to the said Propositions, as he desired the King should send; and the said Earle of Southampton, who was that night to lye in the Kings Bed-Chamber, would perswade the King to condiscend unto it; and thereupon the said Master Holes with∣drew, and either the same day, or the next day following the said Master Holles accordingly carried in his hand unto the said Lords, or one of them, a paper ready written, which (as he said) was such an answer to the said Propositions, as he had drawne for the King to send to the Parliament; which was taken by the said Lords, or one of them, and carryed to the King to be considered of; and so much thereof as advised the Kings comming to London was laid by, the King fearing to adventure himselfe, but the rest of the said Paper the Lord Digby (who writ the Kings Answer to the Propositi∣ons) made use of, in the same words as the said Master Holles had set downe And the said Master Holles to ingratiate himselfe with the Kings Party, did about the same time revile the well-affected Members of the House of Commons, declaring unto the said Kings Party at Oxford, or some of them, that those well-affected Members (which, to render them the more odious as he concei∣ved, he named the violent Independant party) had ill intentions and great aversenesse to peace; and that nothing would be more pleasing to them then for the King to refuse the Propositions how unreasonable soever the same were; And he also then said, That the Commissioners of Scotland were very weary of that violent party, and that they being desperate to establish their Presbytery here as in Scotland, made their addresses to him, the said Master Holles and his Party All which tended to the protracting of the said late Ware and to the hinderance of an happy peace And the said Mr. Holles did also after that receive from the said Erle of Lindsey at Oxford a Letter written in white Inke, concer∣ning some secret designe, and kept it from the knowledge of the House from February till about July after, when it was discovered by him that brought it, but the Letter it selfe was by the said Mr. Holles (after he had read it) burnt; and the said Earle of Lindsey
moved the King for a Passe for the said Mr. Holles to goe to Ox∣ford, but the King refused to grant it, saying, That Holles did him better service in the Parliament then he could doe him at Oxford. II. That the said Mr. Holles, and Sir Philip Stapleton, during the said late Warres, when the Earle of Lindsey went from the Tower of London to Oxford, sent severall Messages of intelligence to the Earl of Dorset, and Lord Digby, thereby assuring them, that they, the said Mr. Holles, and Sir Philip Stapleton did better service for the King here in Parliament then they could doe him if they were at Oxford; and the said Sir Philip Stapleton desired, that the said Earle of Dorset would preserve him the said Sir Philip Stapleton, and his friends in the good opinion of the Party at Oxford (which was then the Kings Garrison) and he, the said Sir Philip would doe as much for his Lordship, and his friends here with the Parliament. And the said Mr. Holles, and Sir Philip Stapleton, the more to ingratiate themselves into the favour of the Enemy, did of their owne accord without any direction of the Parliament, draw up other Propositions then those mentioned in the preceding Articles, which they affirmed were in their judgements fit for the King to grant, and for the Par∣liament to desire; and being so drawn up, sent them privately to his Majesty, without any Authority of Parliament to warrant the same. III. That the said Mr. Holles, Sir Philip Stapleton, Sir William Lewis, Sir John Clotworthy, Sir William Waller, Sir John Maynard, Major Gene∣rall Massie, Mr. Glyn, Mr. Long, Col. Edward Harley, and Anthony Nicholl, in the moneths of March, Aprill, May and June last past, and at other times in prosecution of the evill designes in the severall generall Heads mentioned, have frequently assembled, and met to∣gether at the Lady Carliles Lodgings in White Hall, and in other places, with divers other Persons dis-affected to the State (with∣out any Authority of Parliament) for holding correspondency with the Queene of England now in France, and her participants, with an intent by such secret and clandestine treaties amongst them∣selves to put conditions upon the Parliament, and to bring in the King upon their owne termes and having a great power upon the Treasure of this Kingdome, have therewith maintained, and en∣couraged by Pensions and otherwise the Queens Party in Fran e, thereby to beget a second and more bloody War in this Kingdome; and they▪ or some, or one of them assured the Queene 40000. l. per annum, if she would assist them in their Designe, and that they would do more for the King then the Army would do, and that they would finde out some meanes to destroy the Army and their friends. IIII. That in further pursuance of the same evill Designes they, the said Mr. Holles, Sir Phillip Stapleton, Sir William Lewis Sir John Clot∣worthy, Sir William VValler, and Major Generall Massie by the com∣bination aforesaid within the space of three moneths last past, with∣out any Authority of Parliament invited the Scots, and other For∣reine
Forces to come into this Kingdome in a Hostile manner, to abet and assist them in the persecuting and effecting of their said designes. And the said Mr. Holles very lately sent to the said Queene of England, then and still in France, advising her amongst other things speedily to send the Prince into Scotland, to march into this King∣dome in the head of an Army, and did send a speciall Messenger to her for such ends and purposes. And the said Mr. Holles, Sir Philip Stapleton, Sir VVilliam Lewis, Sir John Clotworthy, Sir William Waller, Sir John Maynard, Mr. Glyn, Major Generall Massie, Mr. Long, Col. Ed∣ward Harley, and Anthony Nicholl, have under hand of their owne ac∣cord, without Authority of Parliament listed, or caused, or procu∣red to be listed divers Commanders and Souldiers, endeavouring thereby to leavy and raise a new Warre in this Kingdome, to pro∣tect themselves in their unjust Oppressions, and factious Designes, and have at severall times within the space of two moneths last past invited, encouraged, abetted, and counselled multitudes of Refor∣mado Officers and Souldiers, and other rude persons, tumultuously and violently to gather together at Westminster, to affright and as∣sault the Members of Parliament in their passage to and from the House, to offer violence to the House it selfe, by locking the doore thereof upon them, and so imprisoning them; and by such violences, outrages, and threats, to awe and enforce the Parliament. V. That the said Master Holles, Sir Philip Stapleton, and Mr Glyn, have ben and are obstructers and prejudgers of severall Petitions to the Parliament, for redresse of publique grievances; and the said Master Holles, and Sir Philip Stapleton, in the moneth of May last past, did abuse and affront divers Petitioners; who in a peaceable manner then attended the Committee, whereof Colonell Lee was Chaireman; not onely reviling and reproaching them, but vio∣lently haleing, and boysterously assaulting them, and offered to draw their swords upon Major Tuleday, and others of the said Pe∣titioners; and without any authority or power committed Nicho∣las Tew, one of the Petitioners; and soone afterwards, by the pro∣curement of the said Master Holles and Sir Philip Stapleton, and upon their mis-information to the House, the said Major Tuleday, and Nicholas Tewe, were imprisoned, not being permitted to speake for themselves; and the said Master Glyn about three moneths since, caused the said Nicholas Tewe to be imprisoned in Newgate, and to be deteyned a long time there, for no other cause, but for having a Petition about him which was to be presented to the House. VI. That the said Sir John Clotworthy, Sir VVilliam VValler, and Ma or Generall Massey, have lately in prosecution of the said de∣signes in the said generall heads mentioned, against the knowne Lawes of this Realme, and Rules and Articles of Warre made by Parliament, by an Arbitrary power imprisoned some Members of the Army without any authority, particularly Ensigne Nichols,
whose Pockets they without authority caused to be searched, and severall papers to be taken from him, contrary to the liberty of every Subject, and caused him to be sent a Prisoner from the head Quarters to London, without the authority or privity of the Gene∣rall, or the chiefe Officers of the Army commanding in his absence. VII. That in or about the moneth of March last, (there being a Petition intended from the Officers and Souldiers of the Army to their Generall (for such things onely as were justly due unto them, and concerning them meerely as Souldiers) The said Sir VVilliam VValler, Sir John Clotworthy, and Colonell Edward Harley, a Member of the Army, (having gotten into their hands a Copy of the said Pe∣tition) by combination with the other Members above mention∣ed, with an intent to abuse the Parliament into prejudices and jea∣lousies against the proceedings of the Army, concerning the said Petition (they well knowing that the said Army stood in their way, and hindereth them from bringing to passe the designes in the said generall Charge expressed) did falsly and malitiously in∣forme the House, That the said Petition was contrived and pro∣moted to debauch and dis-oblige the Army from the Parliament; And that it was managed and carried on by divers principall Offi∣cers in the Army; That Orders were given out for the reading of it in the head of every Regiment, and whosoever would not sub∣scribe it, should be put out of the Musters, and cashiered the Ar∣my: And by those and other aggravations, did represent it to the House as a designe against the Parliament: Further adding, That some Regiments which were remote, were sent for, to joyne with the rest of the Army for that purpose; by which mis-informa∣tions they the said Members did the same day procure a peremptory Order to the Generall, to suppresse the said Petition. VIII. That some few daies after, Colonell Edward Harley, by the combination aforesaid, and in pursuance of the same designes, did produce to the House a Letter, supposed to be written from within the Quarters of the Army, to him the said Colonell Harley, by a person not named, whereby it was informed that Colonell Harleys Lieutenant Colonell had drawne his Regiment to a rendez∣vouze, and had caused the said Petition to be read at the head of it, and that he threatned to cashiere and put out of the Musters all that would not subscribe it; And that the designe of the Army therein, was to inslave the Parliament and Kingdom (if the Parlia∣ment proceeded not to some high resolution) or to that effect, as by th said Letter (relation thereunto being had) may appeare; And although the substance of the said Letter was most untrue, and no author thereof appeared, nor could be produced, although a Committee was appointed for examination thereof, and it was much pressed the author should be discovered; yet the said Colo∣nell Harley, Sir John Clotworthy, and Sir VVilliam VValler, did so avow
the reality of the said Letter, and that the contents thereof would be made good: As that thereby, and by other false suggestions of theirs against the Army, they procured the House (upon a long debate which held till about 8. of the clock at night) to Order, That a Committee of five Members (whereof the said Master Hol∣les was one) should prepare a Declaration to be brought in to the House the next morning, signifying the Houses dislike of the pro∣ceedings of the Army upon that Petition, as by the said Order dated  day of  last, may appeare. Ʋpon which setling of the said businesse, for that night most of the Members departed, as conceiving nothing would be done thereupon till the next day, and that then they might have a free debate concerning the same; But the House still continuing to sit (upon the dispach of some Letters formerly ordered) the said Master Holles by the same combination, and in further prosecution of the said evill designes, having of himself (without the Committee) prepared a Decla∣ration against the Petition it selfe, contrary to the intention and direction of the said Order, and contrary to the rules of Justice, and usuall course of Parliament, did the same night about ten of the clock, on purpose to surprise the House, present the same Declaration to the House, whereby the said Petitioners were (without being heard) declared Enemies to the State, and obstructers of the reliefe of Ire∣land, if they persisted therein, (as by the same Declaration, relation being there∣unto had, may appeare) and did procure it to be then passed accordingly, to the great dishonour of the Parliament and their proceedings, to the insufferable in∣jury, the just provocations, discouragement, and discontent of the Army, to the trouble and danger of the whole Kingdome, to the hindering of the reliefe of Ire∣land, and other the evill consequences in th said generall Charges expressed. IX. That by the same and the like false informations and sug∣gestions the said Colonell Harley (then a Member of the Army) Sir John Clotworthy, Sir William VValler, and the said other persons did shortly after the said Declaration so made as afore-said, procure divers eminent and faithfull Officers of the Army, namely, Liev∣tenant Generall Hamond, Colonell Hamond, Colonell Lilburne, Lieu∣nenant Colonell Pride and others, to be all sent for from their char∣ges in the Army to appeare at the Barre of the House to make an∣swer in relation to the said Petition, against whom when they came thither they could charge or prove nothing at all in so much as the House thought fit immediatly to discharge them. And whereas there was a Committee appointed to examine and consider of the truth or falshood of them and the said members informing were appointed to produce their proofs and evidence to the same before the Commit∣tee, though they have since then been often urged, called upon▪ and demanded to produce their proofes and evidenes thereto (if they had any) and have been plainely told, that if they did not proceed ef∣fectually to doe it, they should be accounted the Authours and de∣visers of the said falshoods, and reparation would accordingly be demanded against them: Yet they have not to this day produced any
proofes or evidence to any of the said informations or suggestions, whereby the Parliament and the Army were so much abused as before is declared: nor could they, or any of them be hitherto perswaded to give in to the said Com∣mittee any charge against the said Officers of the Army, which they have then or since procured to be sent for as aforesaid, but have held divers of them in a long and chargeable attendance upon the House, without any thing laid to their charge, untill the House was pleased to discharge them. X. That the said Master Hollis, Sir Philip Stapleton, Sir VVilliam Lewis, Sir William VValler, Sir Iohn Clotworthy & Major Generall Massie, in further pursuance of the designes mentioned in the generall heads charged against them, have been great instruments in the obstructing of the reliefe of Ire∣land; and within the space of two moneths last past, did falsly informe the House, that by their procurement there were fifty Companies of Foot, and ten Troopes of Horse of this Army ingaged for Ireland, upon the termes, and under the conduct then by the Parliament propounded; and the more to de∣lude the Parliament herein, they, or some of them by the combination afore∣said, did procure divers Officers then in this Army, namely, Collonel Butler, Lievtenant Collonel Iackson, Major Gooday, and others, to give in their names, as listing themselves for Ireland (on the said termes, and conduct propounded) when as those Officers did at the same time declare themselves unwilling thereunto, and resolved not to goe serve in Ireland on any termes whatsoever; they the said Members under-hand assuring them, that though they made use of their names, yet they should not goe for that service: They have likewise untruly informed the House and given in the names of many, considerable Officers of the Army namely, Captain Pennifather, and Captain Burges, of Collonel Butlers Regiment; Captain Clarke, and foure or more commission Officers of Sir Hardresse VVallers Regiment, and others, as ha∣ving been subscribed for Ireland who did not so ingage or subscribe, nor give any consent thereto, but did then, and have ever since utterly disavowed and denied the same. And about the same time they also reported to the House the name and of∣fer of Lievtenant Collonel Farington, as being then a Lievtenant Coll. of this Army and ingaging for himselfe and his Regiment for Ireland where∣as the said Farrington had beene cashiered the Army a yeare and an halfe before. By which and other their untrue informations and reports of that na∣ture. The Parliament was abused and misled into a conceipt and confidence of a strength out of the Army, then supposed to be ingaged and ready for Jreland on their owne termes when as in truth the same was but a meere delusion, and which was so contrived on purpose to occasion a slighting and neglecting of the Army, as supposing no further use for them. XI. Whereas part of three Regiments of foote (viz. Collonel Herberts, Collonel Kemps and Collonel Grayes) were by order of the House advanced towards the reliefe of Ireland as farre as Bromesgrave in the County of
Worcester. The said Sir Philip Stapleton, Master Hollis, Sir Iohn Clotworthy, Sir William Lewis, Major Generall Massie, Sir William Waller, and Master Glyn, by combination aforesaid, did of their owne accord without the know∣ledge or direction of the House, on the sixt day of Iune last, (being Sabbath day and without summoning a Committee) command those forces backe a∣gaine as farre as Reading, with an evill intent to draw forces together to beget a new Warre in England. XII. That the said Sir Iohn Clotworthy, in prosecution of the designes in the said generall charge expressed, hath in the yeares. 1642. 1643. 1644. and since, converted severall great summes of money (which by severall or∣ders of Parliament and of the Irish Committee were designed for the reliefe of Ireland) to his owne particular use; namely the summe of two hundred and eighty pounds, which by Order of both Houses dated the eleventh of Fe∣bruary 1642. was to be payd for twenty butts of sack for Jreland, seven hun∣dred pound which the same day was also ordered for two thousand swords, three hundred pounds which by order of the said Irish Committee dated the fift of Aprill 1643. was designed for one hundred and twenty paire of pistolls, and divers other summes of money upon severall other orders which he the said Sir Iohn Clotworthy from time to time received for the use and reliefe of Ireland, but were not imployed to the uses, by the said orders intended and directed, but to his the said Sir Iohn Clotworthyes owne private use as afore∣said, And that he hath within two yeares last past received severall fummes of monyes, armes, and other provisions for a troope of horse, which he pre∣tended he had raised in Ireland, whereas he had not, nor did raise or furnish any such troope as he pretended, And that he the said Sir Iohn Clotworthy for money and other rewards hath preferred John Davis, and William Summers and others to be entrusted with the Irish affaires who have kept correspon∣dency with the enemy, and have defrauded the State of other great summes of money, and he hath beene privy to and a sharer in such their actions. XIII. That about November last past the said Sir Iohn Clotworthy being by the Parliament sent a Commissioner with others into Ireland, who all had a joynt power or authority to treate with the Earle of Ormond for the space of foure dayes and no more, he the said Sir Iohn Clotworthy contrary to the speciall trust reposed in him, held secret intelligence with the said Earl of Or∣mond, by cypher or character without the consent or knowledge of those o∣thers in Commission with him, and many weekes after the time so limited was expired, & about the same time he the said Sir Joh. Colworthy held the like se∣cret intelligence with the L. George Digby then in Ireland beyond the time prefix∣ed and without the consent of the said other Commissioners, and in order there∣unto the Lord Ormond and Digby, lately employed one Slingsby who pretends a designe about the Prince to come into this Kingdome. XIIII. That the said Sir John Clotworthy, Master Hollis, Sir Philip Stapleton by combination with the rest of the Members before named (in furher prosecu∣tion
of the designes mentioned in the  late president of Ireland was both faithfull and vigilant while he was  the fame Kingdome, and bad now this last spring made provisions ready to march into the field, and that the Lord Baron of Brohill Generall of the Par∣liaments horse in Munster, and Col. Sir Arthur Loftus persons of honour and reputation and of great fortunes in the said Kingdome, lately came purposely into this Kingdome to exhibite and did exhibite many articles of high treason against the Lord Inchequin for betraying the Parliaments Army to the enemy (as formerly he had done) yet by the great power and violent interposition of the said Sir John Clotworthy, Master Hollis Sir Philip Stapleton, by the practise and combination aforesaid, the said Articles have been obstructed, and the busi∣nesse not suffered to come to a hearing, and the said Lord Lisle hastily called out of Ireland, and the power and command of the Parliament forces in that King∣dome committed to the said Lord of Inchequin to the losse of this Summers ser∣vice and the expence of much treasure to make new preparations of warre: and whereas the said Lord Lisle being so suddenly called from thence as aforesaid did designe and depute Sir Hardres Waller Knight Major Generall of the forces there, a man of known integrity and courage both for his service in England and in Ireland, and of considerable fortunes, there to take care of the said Lord Lisles forces till the pleasure of the Parliament might be further known. The said Lord of Inchequin upon the receipt of a Letter from the said Sir John Clotworthy, Master Hollis, and Sir Philip Stapleton or one of them, or from some other person by their or one of their direction, privity, procurement did expresse that he had or∣der or direction from London that no man that favoured the Independents (under which name the said Lord of Inchequin hath comprehended all men that have shewed themselves opposite to tyranny and arbitrary government) should have any trust or warrant there, nay though they were of another judgement yet if they would not prosecute the Independents, they should not be imployed there, or words to that effect; and under colour thereof the said Sir Hardres Waller, and all others that formerly had had their Commissions from the said L. Lisle while he commanded, were displaced; to the discouragement of those other faithfull persons, and to the Parl. and to the great disservice and danger of the losse of the Kingdome. XV. That whereas a Committee of the House of Commons hath been late∣ly appointed by the Parliament to consider of Propositions for the settling and preservation of Wales, whereof the said Sir William Lewis, and Master Glyn were and are Members, and to report the same to the House; They the said Sir William Lewis and Master Glyn, with others of the said Committee, did on the 30. day of April now last past, without any authority of Parliament before any report made to the House of their own accord (in stead of settling and preserving Wales) order that all Committees for Sequestrations should forbeare all procee∣dings of Sequestration against all, or any of the Inhabitants of Wales; and al∣though some few persons were upon general heads excepted, Yet by vertue of that
peace and Commissioners of Association,  were as active in raising money, and pressing men to serve against the Par∣liament as any others, all the Commissioners of array, that did or should at any time come in, and submit to the Parliament or their Commanders in chiefe, without any limitation of time, all that had born Armes against the Parliament, unlesse they were Governours and other Officers of war, that held out some Towne, Castle, or Fort against the Parliament; All disaffected, and scandalous Ministers (though in their Sermons they usually reviled and scandalized the Parliament, and their proceedings calling them Rebels and Traitors, and not only incensing the people aginst the Parliament, but usually taking up Arms, and leading their Parishioners in arms upon any alarum against the Parli∣ament, and many other desperate Delinquents have been, and still are taken off and freed from sequestration, and the said order was sent to every Committee in Wales, in severall Letters contrary to severall Orders and Ordinances of Par∣liament, and contrary to the rules of Justice and equity, which should imparti∣ally be administred as well in Wales as in other places of this Kingdome, where∣by the ill-affected Gentry and Ministry of that Country are growne so high and insolent, that honest men dare scarce live amongst them; so as that which was intended by the Parliament, to settle and preserve Wales, is (by the practice of the said Sir William Lewis, and Master Glyn) perverted to the danger and de∣struction of it. XVI. That the said Sir William Lewis, and Master Glyn, have further ingratiated themselves with the Delinquents of Wales, and prepared them for their said Designes in manner following, viz. he the said Sir William Lewis hath within two yeares last past, counte∣nanced and protected many of the most notorious and dangerous De∣linquent within the severall Counties of South-Wales, namely the Lord of Carberry, and others in Carnarvon-shire, Master Carue and others in Glamogan-shire, Master Morgan, late Knight of the shire, Master Iohn Herbert and others in Brecnock-shire, Master Gwyn, Ma∣ster Lewis, and divers others in Radnor-shire, by freeing some of them altogether from compositions, though Sequestred; by labouring di∣vers Members of the House and of Committees to be favourable in compounding with others, and to admit of such to their Com∣positions as were uncapable thereof; And the said Sir William Lewis hath animated, and encouraged some of the said persons to conti∣nue their fidelity to the Kings cause, promising them, that if they would ingage their friends with the King for him, he & his would be their friends in the Parliament, insomuch as his friends (the De∣linquents in those parts) have lately looked upon him as a rising man
when the King shall come to London, which hath lately been their constant boasting. And the said Sir William Lewis hath within two yeares last past, caused divers that had been Commissioners for the King, and had pressed men, and raised money to promote the late warre against the Parliament, namely his brother Master Thomas Lewis, Master Gwyn, Master Charles Walbiffe, Master Meredith Lewis Master Edward Williams, and many others, to be Commissioners of the Peace, and Committee men for the said County of Brecknock; insomuch as those that have been most active and faithfull to the Par∣liament, have bin, and still are outvoted in those places, and can doe no considerable service for the Parliament, and the rather for that the said Sir William Lewis hath also procured one Edward Williams (his owne Kinsman, and one much disaffeected to the Parliament) to be Sollicitor of Sequestrations in the said County, who is & hath been very remisse and corrupt therein. And the said Sir William Lewis hath by the meanes aforesaid lately procured Master Edmond Lewis his Sonne (though unfit for that imployment) to be chosen and returned Burges for Brecknock; which that he might the better effect he kept the writ for election of the said Burges above eight months, in his own custody before it was deli∣vered to the Sheriffe of the said County. And likewise that the said Mr. Iohn Glyn within two yeares last past hath procured several persons that have lately beene Commissioners of Array and in Armes against the Parliament in Northwales viz.  and ters, to be named in the Commissions of the peace for the Countyes of Denbigh and Carnarvon, and other Counties there, and to be put in other great place; of trust and command there. And amongst others Col∣lonel Glyn his brother, who was lately a Collonel in the Kings Army is by the said Master John Glyns procurement become Governour of the Town and Castle of Carnarvon and Admirall or Viceadmirall of the Irish Seas, to the endangering of those Counties lying upon the Coasts towards Ireland and to the feare and discouragement of the well affected Inhabitants of those places. XVII. That the said Sir William Lewis, being heretofore (during these troubles) Governour of Portsmouth, a Garrison for the Parliament, in which time he received much of the publike Treasure, for which he hath not yet given an Accompt, did while he was Governour there frequently hold cor∣respondencie and intelligence with the Kings Party about the delivery up of the said Garrison; insomuch as although Sir William Waller, and divers others in that Garrison were proclaimed Traitrs to the King yet he by the Kings speciall Command was spared, the King affirming That the said Sir William Lewis was his Friend and that he was confident hee would doe him good service, or to that effect. And although he then was a Parliament-man and Governour of Portsmouth as aforesaid, and his estate in the said County
of Brecknock, being of the value of above 600. pounds per Annum, was three years in the Kings Quarters, yet the same was never Seqeustred: And since the Parliament hath prevailed, Collonel Herbert Price, Esquire, having been Governour of Brecknoc for the King against the Parliament, being sequestred, the said Sir William Lewis by his sollicitations to the Committee, procured the personall Estate of the said Collonel Price, which the Committee of the County had found out, and caused to be brought to Morgan Aubrayes house in Brecknoc, to be restored unto him, without any satisfaction to the State, and hath procured his the said Col. Price's lands in the said County of Brecknoc, being worth about 300 pounds per Annum, to be let to a friend of the said Col. Prices, to his wives use, at fifty pounds per Annum contrary to the dire∣ctions of the severall Ordinances of Parliament made in that behalfe. XVIII. That the said M. John Glyn, or some other person or persons, by his direction, consent, or privity, or to his use, hath (during his being a Mem∣ber of the House of Commons, taken rewards of severall persons for service done them in the House, as namely amongst others, divers Drovers from Wales, who by his means and procurement had an allowance by Order of the House for three thousand pounds, in satisfaction of losses they had sustained by the Enemy, did pay unto the wife of the said M. Glyn, the summe of an hundred pounds, as a reward for his said service. XIX. That the said M. John Glyn, as he hath been most active to bring in∣to the Commission of Peace, and into other places of Authority, divers noto∣rious Delinquents in North Wales, as aforesaid, so hath been as active, as much as in him lies, to put out, and keep out of the Militia, and Common-Coun∣cell of London and out of the Commission of Peace for Middlesex, many emi∣nent and faithfull men, that have laid out their estates, and adventured their lives for defence of the Parliament and City, in the time of their greatest ne∣cessity; namely, Alderman Pennington, Collonel Tichborne, M. Estwick, Mr. Moyer, and others, contrary to the Declaration of both Kingdomes, which hath assured all lawfull favour and encouragement to those that have beene faithfull, and shall so continue to the Parliament: which doings must needs tend to the giving a fresh occasion and power to the Enemy against the Par∣liaments best friends, to the dishonour of the Parliament, and the indanger∣ing of the Kingdome. XX. That the said Sir Philip Stapleton, M. Hollis, and Sir William Lewis, have by their power and countenance, as Members of the House of Com∣mons, both joyntly and severally, used means to obstruct the course of Justice, and have interposed themselves in severall Causes, and by word of mouth mo∣ved and perswaded Judges and other Officers, on the behalfe of such as they conceive to be their friends: Amongst others, whereas a great Cause was lately depending in the House of Lords, betweene Alderman Langham and Captain Lymery, and Counsell was met for the pleading thereof, the said Sir Philip Stapleton, M. Hollis, and Sir William Lewis, did repaire to the Earle of Rutland about the same; and the said Sir Philip Stapleton told the said Earle,
that they (meaning himselfe, and the said M. Hollis, and Sir William Lewis) were fully satisfied concerning the Justice of Langhams Cause; and therfore as the said Earle did respect them the said Sir Philip Stapleton, M. Hollis, and Sir VVilliam Lewis or expected from them, he the said Earle of Rutland should give his Vote for Langham; or used words to that effect; which also was se∣conded by the said M. Hollis in words, and agrreed unto by the said Sir VVil∣liam Lewis, as appeared by his presence and gesture. And the said Sir VVilli∣am Lewis did exercise the same power in a Cause of Iohn Gunters, or others. XXI. That the said M. Anthony Nichols although about foure yeares since he was by the Committee of Priviledges voted, that he was not a Member fit to sit in the House, by reason his election was void, yet he the said M. Ni∣chols doth not only sit and Vote there as a Member, but by his power and threats in the West-Countries, and by his solicitations, and indirected pra∣ctises, hath brought in or procured to bee brought in, about twenty eight Members more out of Cornwall, on purpose to carry on the designes and practises before mentioned, and to make a faction in the said House: and not∣withstanding the selfe-denying Ordinance, he the said M. Nichols doth still hold a place in the Tower formerly conferred upon him by the House, and receiveth the profits thereof to his owne use. XXII. That the said M. Nicholls, hath since his sitting in the House as afore∣said taken rewards for service done there, namely, whereas Sir William Vuedall Knight, for deserting the Parliament and going to York with the King was sus∣pended the House, he the said M. Nicholls for the summe of one hundred pounds or one hundred fifty pounds paid unto him, or to his use, by the said Sir William Vuedall or some for him, did by mis-informations to the House procure the said Sir William Vuedall to be re-admitted a Member of the said House, and the said M. Nicholls while he was a Member of the Committee for safety, he and others of the said Cōmittee having issued forth a warrant for searching Greenwich-house, he the said M. Nicholls did under-hand acquaint one of the Queens officers there∣with, and thereby prevented the designe of the said Committee, to the great dis∣service of the Parliament and Kingdome. XXIII. That the said M. Long at the beginning of the late warres not ha∣ving courage sufficient to perform his duty in military affairs, did out of cove∣tousnesse or other unworthinesse procure a command of a troop of horse under his Excellency the L. Gen. the late E. of Essex, but when ever his said troop came upon any service, he the said M. Long out of feare or treachery unworthily absented him∣self and never was seen or known to charge the enemy in person, though his troop often engaged, namely, at the battell at Edgehill, when he saw there was like to be blowes, he the said M. Long left the field, and never charged before his Troop, and at the battell or fight at Brainford, though his Troop was there, yet he staid at London till the danger was past, and fighting done; and when his Troop was sent into the West, he took no other notice of it but to receive his pay, and in the mean while he repaired into the County of Essex, and procured a commission to be a Collonell of Horse, and in stead of fighting against the Parliaments ene∣mies he betook himself to plunder, and oppresse the Parliaments friends there,
& contrary to order, and without any authority or exigencies of War, compelling him thereto, inforced great summes of money, & many Horses, and other provisi∣ons from the Country, namely from M. Tho. Manwood, a man well affected, who had the Generalls protection, (whose horses were taken from his plough) and o∣thers, to the great losses and oppression of the people, and to the great dishonor of the Parliament, whose service he neverthelesse neglected, and hath not hitherto given an account of the great summes of money and other things he so exacted from the Country as aforesaid. XXIV. That the said M. Long afterwards (upon pretence of some losses su∣steined by the enemy, and some great service he had done for the State) did pro∣cure of the House a great office in the Coancery, namely to be the chief Register of that Court, wherein his skill was little, and whereof he was and is still alto∣ther uncapable; and although for a time upon the self denying Ordinance, he was displaced; yet upon the motion, or by the power and means of the said M. Hollis he hath obtained the same office, to the great prejudice of skilfull Clerks, that have been bred up in the same Court, and to the disservice of the Common-wealth, and the dishonor of the House. XXV. That the said M. Long on purpose to drive on the designes in the said generall Charges expressed, hath for the space of two yeares last past, usually pressed and urged severall Members to give their Votes such wayes as he pleased, and to that end and purpose doth constantly plac himself neare the doore of the House, that when any debate is concerning any designe wherein his party is in∣gaged, he the said M. Long hath used much tampering and violence to such of his own party as woud go out of the House, and hath perswaded them to con∣tinue there for their Votes, and he the said M. Long in case any such have gone out of the House, hath been very inquisitive where they may be found, that so he may go for them, when the businesse in debate comes near to be put to the vote and when they come not according to his expectation doth ordinarily run out of the House himself to call them, and drive them in again, that he hath beene commonly called (by those that are without the House, and have taken notice of his actions) the Parliament-driver, whereby the freedome of the Members is taken from them, the māner of the Parliaments proceedings much scandalized and many times evill and dangerous designes drove on in a faction by Votes, to the great prejudice of the Common-wealth. All which matters and things the said Army shall and will be ready (in con∣venient time) to make good by proof upon Oath, as his Honorable House shall direct. And for that by reasn of the straightnesse of time, and other more weigh∣ty Affairs of the Army, they could not so fully finish and accomplish the said Ar∣ticles; therefore the said Army do still reserve further liberty to adde other Ar∣ticles against the said Members, or any of them, at any time before their Triall as occasion ssiall serve. By the appointment of his Excellency Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX. and his Councell of Warre. Signed John Rushworth Secretary.
