6074a.4 S2553 [ocm]24323381 178618
A pleasant new song that plainely doth show, that al are Beggers, both high and low, A meane estate let none despise: for tis not Money that makes a man wise. To the tune of Cuckolds all a row. COme cease your songs of Cuckolds row for now tis somthing stale, And let vs sing of Beggers now, For thats in generall, In City and in Country, men from high to low, In each degrée or quality, Are Beggers all a row. How many men are there that liue, and doe no good at all? And such had rather spend, then giue to them that liue in thrall, Los a hundred at a cast, as much at the next throw, But what comes of them at the last, Beggers all a row. Some countrey Lads that backward thriues, left with a large estate, Weary of those countrey liues, they haue enough of that: The countrey then the City courts, a countrey life's too low, For here are many tricks and sports, makes Beggers all a row. First for a Coach and horses, theres one reuersion flies, ond  new Fashions, nities, Maid and Man, e growes low, ch for a Sedan, I saw a handsome proper youth, and he was wonderous fine, But when I vnderstood the truth, his case was worse then mine, On wine and Drabs, he did all spend, which wrought his ouerthrow, So fortune plac'd him in the end, with Beggers all a row, I haue a Mistris of mine owne, that beares a lofty spirit, Though gold and siluer she hath none nor any good demerit, Yet will she braue it with the best, where euer she doth goe, And be at euery Gossips feast, with Beggers all a row. But of all Beggers he's the worst, that doth complaine he's poore: And euermore shall be accurst, that starues in midst of store, Let Vsurers therefore take heed, least to the Deuill they goe, That doe complaine before they neede, with Beggers all a row Gilbert loues the Ale-ouse well, Dick will not be behnd, Iane and Tib, and bonny Nell, are to each other kind, For two full pots, come let vs ioyn although our states be low, My money ll shall goe with thin Begge  ow.
The second part, To the same tune. IN faith my Landlord is not paid, and what care I for that, My Grannam she hath often said, that care will kill a Cat, Come fill vs tother Pot good Boy, and then introth wéele goe, Come neighbour why are you so coy, we are Beggers all a row. Ione hath paund her band of Lawne, and Tom his fudling Cap, Ralph hath laid his Cloke to pawne, for to maintaine the Tap, The Ale-house thriueth best I sée, this all the world doth know, So here good follow here's to thee, Beggers all a row. I haue another Teaster yet, and cannot be content, I cannot rest nor quiet sit, till all my money be spent, Too much money makes men mad, the prouerb plaine doth show, And want of mony makes men sad, and Beggers all a row. The bloudy fight moues me to wrath, betwéne  Dutch and Spaine, I gladl  ould know the truth, who  fight did gaine, The D tempted as its knowne, the Srd's ouerthrowe, Now b f them may make their moane, w'ar ggers all a row. A Country man did sell his Nagge, thrée Heafers, and a Bull, And brought to towne a Canuas bag, with writings filled full, But all the money that he had the Lawyer puld it too, Alasse poore man thy cause is bad, Beggers all a row. Two men did passe their words of late for a Knaue as I did heare, They paid the debt, and broke their state for he would not appeare, Let others take example then, lest they themselues ouerthrow, To day they may be gentlemen, then Beggers all a row. I that made this song of late, haue well obserued the time, Ide rather liue in meane estate, then higher seeke to climbe, My money is my lackie-boy, I send him too and fro, Swéet content I doe inioy, with Beggers all a row. He that begges an almes of heauen, cannot complaine he's poore, His daily Bread, is daily giuen, what can he wish for more? Thus all are Beggers euery day, all both high and low, In this we may conclude and say, ware Beggers all a row. Humfrey Crowch. FINIS. inted y M. F. for R. Harper, and are to be sold at the Bible and  in Smithfield
