19120.7 S121806 [ocm]19241059 178673
❀ A MOORNING DITI VPON THE DECEAS OF THE MOST NOBL Prins HENRY EARL of ARVNDEL, The auncient & Primer Coounte of England, and right honorabl Baron Mautrauers & Clun one of Gour mest gracious Queen ELIZABETHS Maiesteez most honorabl priuy Coounsel, and of the right nobl Order of the Garter the eloeu Knight: that departed in the Lord at hiz Place by Toour hil ny London, on Thurzday Saint Matthiez day the latter xxiiii. of February in the xxii. yeer of her highnes most prosperoous Rein. 1579. CArez & complaints that ruful moornings may purport, Proceding from a minde with woez opprest: A heauy hart dooun sunk within the brest, A damped coountenauns deuoid of all comfort, May best beseem the state of woful wight: And so may sorroz smart, vs rightfully compell With sighs profoound bewail in careful plight, The late deceas of hun whooz honor did excell, HENRI that nobl Prins the EARL of ARVNDELL. Descended-from Caro∣lus magnus w bodied. at Aix 815. Born & allyed in Line long & Heroicall, Coomly in foorm of featurez & personage, Matched in hy & equall mariage,His first Wife Mary the Lord Marques Dorsets daughter. Parent to one Woorthy Lord & Ladyz twoo, withall: Henry lord Matrauers For the rare bloomz of tru Nobilttee That first oout budded in hiz tender spring, Lady Iane maried to Iohn Lord Lumley. Lady Mary maried to Thomas Duke of Norfolk. The Earl hiz Father yet aliue, William & hee But Lord Mautrauers: Anno .xxx. Hen. viii. Oour late most famoous King Of Callis too him gaue the trust & goouerning. The weighty charge whearof when he had vnderfong, He ransakld the orderz olld & nu, The good he held in execution du, The bad he brake, and ay by Iustis righted wrong: With the tine French he tempred in such sort Az for hiz Proowes great & Pollecyz agen, For Faine to Prins & safety to the Fort, Both far & neer it waz pronoounced of all men. That Callis neuer had like Capitain az then. Oour King him made vpon this fiue yeerz nobl say, Captain of Calles v. yeeres. At Bullen seege hy Marshall of hiz host: Lord Mar∣shall at the seege of Bullen. An .xxxv. Henry viii. Wheraz hiz peinz his daungerz with the most, Hiz valiauns by hart & hand waz prompt all way. And though a molehil to a mooknt be small, For certein truth yet this the writer bringz to minde, Whoo serued him thear at theez most actionz all: And for the grace enteet that euer he did finde, May most deplore hiz death, but honor all his kinde. The Prins benign anon soon az the tooun he wan. xxxv. Hen. viii. Prou. 17. For seruis hy ooon by this nobl Peer, Chaz him too be one of hiz Coounsel neer, Lord Chamberlain allso: which Honorz after than King Edward gaue him: but Queen Mary made, Him Prezident of Coounsel and Lord Stuard too be: Of our Queen eak that dignitee he hade. Anno .i. Regine Elizabeth. Prou. Ibidem. So az a thing it is right euident to se, In hoow great grace With all hiz Soouerainz waz he. The higher karged ship, and deepar it dooth draw, The daunger more of storm of rok & sand, And blasts may blo that no state can withstand. At anker holld of Fortitude when roze a flaw, He lay, with honor till he cam to port. And az he thought none praized vertu az they ow, Onles their deedz tru vertu did reaport, He surely for hiz part, commended vertu so, Az waz hiz Embleam, LAVS VIRTVTIS ACTIO. For Woorthy pleazurz ells: hiz Hors & Armour sitch. Hiz skil profoound in both, his solem Queer By vois & Instruments so sweet to heer, Hiz Iewelz, Antiquiteez, so many rare & ritch, Hiz Tablz, Cloks, & his symmetricall Billdingz, so lumptuoously adoournd in euery part: For eend, his exquizit appointments all So excellent for cost, for hy deuise & art, Az might be signz certain of hiz so nobl hart. For seruis then, for honor, or for hiz Princez pleazure, Twise Em¦bassadour to King Philip in Flaunderz and cheef Cōmisione: in Queene Maryes dayes. Hoow mooch ioyd he thear too be liberall? Of hart sy nceer toward the Noblz all, Too State of life he made his Birthdegree his meazure, Ootherz merit small, mooch he wolld avauns Boounteous, benign, releeuing many greeuous gronez, In freendship firm for ony chaunge or chauns. But ah for wo: dear death not moouabl by monez, All theez hiz shining lights quite quenched hath at onez. Obscuring orgulioously by dark & deadly blast, The lustr of Iewell, the more inestimabl, Az iz the loss so far irreperabl: An Earl, a Peer, a Prins, the only & the last Of that so by FITZ ALLENZ name & blood, But why so sharp O Memory doost thoou declare Theez groudz of greeuez: more meet wear for thy mood Sum Opium for sleep or ells white Nenupbare, A sooup of Lethes lake for to forget thy care. But noow, az wants a cheef one amoong the States hy, So Nobl youth, & all of gentl hart: The Herallds sage, the wize & learnd in Art, Borne at Gaunt 1500 Croound Emperoor at Bonon 1530. This forlorn skath alas be wail may rufully And thoou infaust day, dismoll, bisextill, Not hallt by Charliez birth & coronation sight So good, Charlez slain by con¦spiratoour at Burges 1127. I.  The french Kings poour  slain and he  takeat Pau  1525. Io. az too the Earl of Flaunders ill And too French Frauncis eak. O cruell in thy spight Wo woorth the tune that noow so soon ye camst too light. But sins that, heauy sprite dooth freat the minde to nought, Driez vp the bonez & gallz the hart so sore, Healps not the case (God wot) a whit the more, By wizdoom then bethink we, heerin az we ought, First yt this Peer (hoow euer wear the case) With looue of all Estatz in harts sinceer enrolld, In honor pure did run hiz nobl rase, Then saw his Childerz Children (a crooun to hiz yeerz olld Az Graūdstre (to their glory) eak him they did behold. Whoo wear so vertuous all of minde & inclination As God took them, the sooner to be blest: Yet heer left one to coountervail the rest, Of whooz encreasing honor such iz the expectation That in Avitall State & Dignitee Az he succeedz & luckily enioyz the same, So hope iz that through Gods benignitee: By him shall glister long in honor & in fame, The bright shine of ye magnific ARVNDELLI name. Bethink we eak hoow well he dispozed thingz eachon, What tender woords our Queen vntoo him sent: Wherat his hart did earn, hiz eiz relent, Reizd vp hiz febl Sprite, that then by him anon Intoo the Lords handz recommended is. In Fame & in Succession sins heer he liueth ay, In Soul allso too euerlasting bits Let vs by solas suppl oour sorroz az we may, And hope in Christe to haue a ioyful meeting day, Deuinctissimò (pro facultate) Arundelius. Guil. P. G. ¶ Born on Saint Georgez day 1512. Liued a Coounseller and in great Officez 43. yéer. Buryed at Arundell in Sussex Tuisday the 22. of March An. R. R. E. 22. ¶ Imprinted at London by Iohn Allde.
