F1439 [ocm]12042220 196742
AN ANATOMY OF INDEPENDENCY, OR, A Briefe Commentary, and Moderate Discourse upon The APOLOGETICALL NARRATION of Mr Thomas Goodwin, and Mr Philip Nye, &c. BY Argument, laying naked the dangers of their Positions, AND From Experience, discovering their spirits and wayes. 1 THES. 5.22. Prove all things, hold fast that which is good. Published by Authority. LONDON, Printed for Robert Bostock, dwelling in Pauls Church-yard, at the sign of the Kings head, 1644.
Imprimatur, IA. CRANFORD. Iune 7. 1644.
The Preface. THese being times (according to the judgement of the most godly and judicious) wherin God is to make both men and every mans work manifest, and to try of what sort it is, and that by judgement beginning at his owne house, 1 Cor. 3.13. 1 Pet. 4.17. to the end that what cannot endure the triall, being burnt by this fire kindled in the Church of God, and what will hold weight in the ballance of the Sanctuary abiding, the unhappy and scandalous divisions, even of the true members of Christs body, being taken away the Church may rejoyce to see her brethren dwelling together in unity. It needs not seeme strange to any spirituall and discerning eye, to see either more differences or divisions to have appeared of late in the Church of God then formerly, or any men with the Authours of this Apologeticall Narration (as they in the beginning thereof professe) to be forced to anticipate such discoveries of themselves, and their opinions, as they otherwise resolved to leave to time and experience of their wayes and spirits: it being impossible, opinions should be thus tried, unlesse discovered, and that in his time who best knoweth the due season of such discoveries, and not in mans who at his best being but vanity knoweth not his time, Eccl. 9.11. If withall we consider, that a maine hindrance unto Reformation, both of the inward judge∣ments and affections of men, and of the outward state and condition, as of mens conversations, so of the doctrine and discipline of the Church, proceeds from a grosse mistake, whereby all opposing the wayes of the Hierarchy, are judged by the wayes of some, and equally and indifferently ranked in one rank, and delineated by one character, and under one notion of Puritan, Brownist, or Independent, if not of Anabaptist: it must be found a thing not only expedient, but also very necessary to make a full discovery of men, and their opinions and
wayes, that every man appearing in his own colours and livery, may be the better dscerned and owned, and that wise and prudent distin∣ction and difference between Puritan and Puritan (as the world pleaseth to call them) which King James observeth in the Preface to his Basilicon Doron, may the better qualifie and prepare the spirits, especially of these in authority, to strengthen the hands of such as stand for Reformation, while they appeare to be such, whom King James there protesteth upon his honour, he equally loveth and ho∣noureth with men of Episcopall humour and opinion; and that the rather, if they consider how he describeth them, to wit, Preachers and others that like better of the single forme of policy in the (then) Church of Scotland, then of the many ceremonies in the Church of England, that are perswaded, that their Bishops smell of a Papall Supremacy, that the Surplice, the cornered Cap, and such like, are the outward badges of Popish errours: (thus farre he:) adding that, which if it were the opinion of others in authority, likewise (to wit) that he ever esteemed these things indifferent, though they did not judge them (as they ought) evill; yet what a ready way might it make for a cheerfull yeelding unto Reformation, it being urged and prosecuted by such men. Besides, that such a discovery is very re∣quisite, that every man may beare his owne burthen, and the inno∣cent and sincere Professor, pursuing nor breathing after nothing but Religion, Order, and Policy in the Church, may not suffer with such as affecting singularity stumble upon disorder and confusion. These being the sincere aymes and ends of this ensuing Discourse, though my weaknesse may perhaps in measure frustrate both me and it of obtaining these ends; yet I hope the integrity of these aymes shall procure, as, an acceptance of what shall be found subservient to thse ends, so also a charitable construction of, and pardon for what may come short thereof, especially from these my brethren the Au∣thors of this Apology, since it is their maine desire to be discovered and judged by experience of their wayes and spirits: which is the work of this Discourse.
A BRIEF COMMENTARY Or Discourse upon the Apologeticall Narration, &c. IN the entery of this Apologeticall Narration, our Brethren lay down the ground moving them to the writing and publishing thereof, to be the sudden and unexpect∣ed noise of confused exclamations in the interpreta∣tion of the most, reflecting on them, though not so ex∣presly directed against them in particular. This noise was sudden and unexpected: sudden and unexpected noyses use to arise from sudden and unexpected grounds, which makes me suspect there might be some realitie in such noyses of un∣expected and strange exclamations, and expressions of Indepen∣dents against Presbyteriall Government, as have come to our ears, which might be the cause of the suddennesse of these exclamati∣ons against them: but that they should not have expected this noise, as it might seem somewhat strange to any, who know how liberall, they have been from time to time to vent their contume∣lious and scornfull censures on Presbyteriall Government, and considers them standing at such a distance in their wayes and go∣vernment from all Christian Churches; so on the other hand, it seems no wayes strange to me, that these who are possest with such a conceit, and confidence of themselves, their abilities in searching and finding out new Truths, and their wayes as is ordinarie for most of their mould, to be, and as this Apologie shews they are, should not expect to hear any whisper against them, though they my censure others at their pleasure. But why were not these ex∣clamations particularly directed against them? if it be, because
perhaps they were not particularly named, this is but a poore rea∣son; if it be because they are not guiltie, of the matter of these ex∣clamations, and particularly of Independency, abhorring that proud and insolent title, pag. 21. and 23. yet these exclamations might be directed against them (though unjustly.) Secondly, how justly they plead not guiltie in the matter of these exclamations, shall (God willing) appear in our insuing Discourse; though we will not affirm they are guiltie of all, which perhaps might by these exclamations have been fastned on them, yet if they be guil∣tie, but in the least part or measure, it is enough to shew these ex∣clamations might be at least in part directed against them. Third∣ly, may it not seem strange, that these our Brethren should be so averse from owning exclamations against Independency and Inde∣pendents as directed against them; whereas they not onely professe here, in this Apology what pains they have taken to find out, and establish in their Churches that Government which they know the world cals Independencie; but know also, that they are looked upon generally by all as the chief Authors, and abettors thereof in all England. They will not own the name of Independency, yet if we speak or preach against Independency, they will tell us we preach against them, as appeared in a late instance of one of these our Brethrens own fellow-labourers in the same Congregation at Rotterdam with some one of his flock, expostulating with another Reverend Divine for telling his people, that that Government which they sware to maintain in the Scots Covenant did exclude Independency, affirm∣ing this was to preach against them. This noise enforced them to this Apologie, and that by antici∣pation. That this Apology and discoverie came out by force, I can easily beleeve: for their sparingnesse in discovering themselves therein may sufficiently shew us they could have been better con∣tented to have made no discovery of themselves at all, if something had not enforced them unto it at this time, but that that was rather the fear of loosing their expected liberty, then the noise of these ex∣clamations, may in my judgement appear from hence: First, the time when this Apology comes forth, when there was likelyhood they should be frustrate of liberty, the desire whereof is the conclusion and result of this Apology. Secondly, to my knowledge the most of them have heard
many exclamations, not onely reflecting, but particularly directed against them in Holland ere now, and I beleeve in England too, un∣lesse their eares have been closer stopt then other mens; nay, as themselves here confesse, pag. 25. and yet none of these exclamati∣ons could awaken them, or enforce them to any Apology, till now at such a nick of time: but they give a sufficient reason of their former silence in England, in that same place; but whether this reason will hold water, we shall see in its own time and place. Thirdly, if their ayme herein had been to take off those mis∣representations, and mis-apprehensions, and mistakes, and reproa∣ches they complain of pag. 23. then surely in all reason they ought to have made a full and plain discovery of themselves, and their wayes, and opinions; whereas it shall (God willing) appear, that their main studie here is to cover, rather then to discover them∣selves, concealing most of all their differences from us, and deliver∣ing some onely in generall termes (as that the truth of Church Discipline lieth in a middle way betwixt Brownisme and Presby∣teriall Government, pag. 24. without telling us wherein this middle way doth consist) which are means rather to confirm the world in that jealousie, that they nourish some Monsters or Serpents of opi∣nions lurking in their bosoms, (whereof they complain, pag. 28.) then to perswade the contrary, though my jealousie of them shall not reach so far. Its no wonder then they tell us, that this Disco∣very is anticipated, and that by force: for something must be said, though against the hair, to underprop their hopes of liberty, which upon these grounds I can hardly beleeve these exclamations should otherwise have wrung out; and therefore what may make for li∣berty shall be discovered, and that in such plausible terms as may best take; but what may prejudize this liberty shall be close cover∣ed as much as is possible. Had they not been thus inforced to this Discovery, they resolved (say they) to have left it to time, and experience of their wayes and spirits, the truest discoverers, and surest judges of all men, and their actions. Here it is worth the observing, first, that they resolved to reserve the main Discovery of themselves to what any might see in their practise, and how loath they were to come to an Apology, or any other kind of Discovery of themselves; therefore they so couch these words, as the discovery by time is so connected unto that by
their wayes and spirits, as by this time they may mean the time of that practise of their wayes, which I find ground rather to conje∣cture, then that by this discovery by time they should mean a dis∣covery by writing, or a full Declaration by word afterwards, from their limitation of that further Declaration, and more exact and scholastique Relation of their judgements in points of Difference, which they promise, pa. 30. where they tell us, we shall have this, (as necessity shall after require) which sheweth us, how loath they are to come to the light further then necessitie forceth them. Secondly, that they were resolved to enter upon the practise of their wayes before any other discovery of their opinions, leaving the world to discover them by their practise if they would: either they must have resolved to have gone on in their way, without see∣king or obtaining leave of the State, or they must have had a strange confidence and strange grounds whereon to build such a confidence of obtaining leave of the State, to set upon a way of their own, with∣out giving a full account what it should be. But it is false that mens wayes are the best Discoverers of men, that is, of mens opini∣ons: for first, mens practise may sometimes out of infirmitie and weaknesse crosse their opinion. Secondly, mens wayes can onely discover men to those, who see their wayes, and so their opinions in England might thus be undiscovered to many even there, who yet might be of the number of those Exclamators against them; whereas a discovery by writing might discover them to all. Third∣ly, it cannot be the best course for satisfying the offended, to leave them to discover us by our wayes: for mens wayes cannot discover men further, then they have occasion to put those waies in practise; and there may be some of those wayes, whereof there may never be occasion, as our Brethren prove themselves, pag. 9. They never exercised Excommunication, how then should their opinion of Ex∣communication be best discovered and judged of by their wayes? Perhaps these two reasons may make them so averse from a dis∣covery of themselves, otherwise then by experience of their wayes. Fourthly, by their wayes we may either understand the practise of their opinions as they interpret themselves, pag. 30. or the con∣sequents arising upon these practises. Secondly, mens actions may be discovered, and judged either physically, or morally; Physically, when they are discovered in their nature and kinde, as when
Independency is judged to be an exemption either of the people of a particular Congregation from the Authoritative power of their Pastors, or Elders, further then they may mutually exercise the same power of government over their Pastors or Elders, or an exem∣ption of all the members of a Church from any subjection to it self, and other Churches authoritatively assembled in a representative body of a Synod: Morally, when mens actions are discovered, and judged just or unjust; as when that Independencie is discovered to be a just or unjust Government in the Church of God. If by their wayes we understand the practise of their opinions, then the experi∣ence thereof cannot be the best discovery and judge of them & their actions: for thus they are onely discovered physically, but not morally, whereas both are to be discovered; it is fit both the world should know what kind of Government, and other wayes they practise or maintain, and likewise should discover the lawfulnesse or unlawful∣nesse thereof, which must be discovered, and judged by another rule then these wayes themselves. If by wayes, we understand the consequents arising upon the practise of such wayes, and thereby will discover and judge the morality of these actions, or that practise, then neither are they thus the best Discoverers and surest Judges of men and their actions, since we all know how unsure it is to judge by the event, though some consequents of our wayes may serve, to give a reasonable touch of the morality thereof: especially these that concern the in∣trinsecall ends of these wayes, as that Government being the best, in the practise whereof we may best attain to the ends of Govern∣ment, where we see the consequents or events of any Government to be most answerable to the ends of Government, we may judge that government to be the best; and therefore one of the main and intrinsecall ends of Government being to conserve peace among the governed. 1 Tim. 2.2. and (by our Brethrens confession, pag. 4.) Presbyteriall Government hath been accompanied with more peace then other Governments, that may be an evidence that it must be the best, and much better then our Brethrens Government, which hath alwayes been accompanied with Rents and Schismes, strife and debate, multiplying of Churches out of Churches; & the peoples casting off their Pastors at their pleasure by their Indepen∣dent liberty; and if not casting them off, yet improving that power
they assume as due unto them to the utmost in reproaching, rebu∣king, and drawing up Articles against them; whereof Mr. Bridge and others, have found plentifull experience at Rotterdam, to the tyring out of his spirit amongst them there; in so far as he hath been often heard to affirm, that if he had known at first, what he met with afterwards, he would never have come amongst them, nor, being amongst them, have given them such scope and liberty as he had: how attainable that end of peace is also in and by their go∣vernment may be perceived by that expression of Mr. Bridges in the time of their distractions at Rotterdam, that since they could not live together with peace, it was better they should separate: all their compleat power amongst themselves in their own Congregations being too narrow a plaister for to heal their sores. Hereupon a great part of that Church did without further leave, or order, or giving any satisfaction for offences, abandon the Church, and joyned with others to the erecting of that Church whereof Mr. Sympson was Pastor, and were by him received without any more ado, not∣withstanding that their Schisme. I cannot here also passe by a no∣table instance of the fruits and consequents of their Government, as one of their wayes, which is this; these two Churches being of late commanded by the Magistrates of Rotterdam to unite again in one, and that Church whereof Mr. Sympson had been Pastor, (and Mr. Symons then was) being unwilling to joyn to the other, unlesse some members thereof should be first put off, especially one, and the Church whereof that party was a member, being willing to gratifie the other in this, and yet professing and attesting as an act of the whole Church by writing, that all the time he had been a member his conversation had been without offence; yet their Teacher must be forced, as himself confesseth, with grief of heart (having nothing to except against the person) to urge him to take his dimission from the Church. If we should judge them by such wayes, must we not judge the Officers by vertue of the peoples In∣dependent liberty, to be enslaved to their corrupt appetites and pleasures? If hereunto we adde the defection of some of their members to Anabaptisme, and how apt others of them are to be made a prey therein by any of that Sect that come along to seek Proselites, more then the members of other Reformed Churches; as late instance
hath manifested, some having professed Mr. Sympsons principles have made them Anabaptists: have we not here their own War∣rant to judge them by these wayes? If their wayes were but as well known in England as they have been at Rotterdam, I doubt not but many would affirm, as I have heard some, who coming out of England in some good opinion of them, being ignorant of their wayes, till they took notice of them there, that they would never have beleeved that their wayes had been such, unlesse they had seen it. The next truest discoverer, and surest Judge they thought to have left this discovery unto, is the experience of their spirits, but this can be no such true discovery of them, or their actions: for as the actions may in themselves be very good, and yet a spirit of pride, envie, &c. may appear in the performance of them, Philip. 1.15, 16. So on the other hand, unjust and illegall actions may be managed with a very fair and approveable temper of spirit, the affection out∣stripping the judgement; who knoweth not that holy and learned men, as these our Brethren are known to be, may hold forth a spi∣rit of Holinesse in actions not approveable; yet since we know, that God, to shew his discountenancing and dislike of evill, even to the best, doth often leave his people to some back-byas of spirit in the prosecution of such wayes as he approveth not, and our Brethren so much desire to be judged by, experience of their spirits; as it was Dr. Ames his prudence and charitie not to judge simply and abso∣lutely of Dr. Burges his spirit, but onely of that spirit, which God left him to put on, when he became a Rejoyner by the marks of his spirit in that work: so shall this be a fit place for us not to judge absolutely of our Brethrens spirits, but onely to discover what spi∣rit God seemeth to have left them to in this their plea and Apology for that unwarrantable Government of theirs, and how free they are of that spirit of schisme, faction, pride, and singularity, where∣of they so much labour, pag. 23. &c. to clear themselves. To this end let any judicious Reader first observe the frame, mo∣dell and style of this Apology, and they shall see it cast in such a mould as may rather dazle a popular eye by specious and Rhetori∣call flourishes, and Pathetick aggravations, with Encomiastick ap∣plauses of their own wayes and proceedings, and so to steal the affections of the ignorant vulgar (more apt to be taken with
Pathetick expressions, then strength of reasons) then satisfie the mind of any intelligent Reader: when the common sort look on them appearing with these expressions, pag. 3. and consider them having all these helps they boast of to find out the truth, their free∣dome & exemption from these temptations that might arise, from the place they went to, the condition they were in, the company they went forth with, to by as them any way: all these inlarged in divers particulars, leaving them as freely to be guided by that touch and light Gods Spirit should by the Word vouchsafe their consciences, as the needle toucht with the Loadstone is in the Com∣passe? What ordinarie capacitie would not beleeve it were im∣possible for such men to misse the mark? & so with an implicite faith follow them whithersoever they should lead them; whereto if we adde the Pathetick aggravations of their miseries, their patient forbearance of preaching, or printing any thing towards the vindi∣cation of themselues, being so every way provoked thereunto, pag. 25. who would not pitie, love, and have compassion on such? And how apt such affections are to beleeve men on their own bare word, the affection commanding and forestalling the judgement, who knoweth not? And yet what weight can be in all these to presse the justnesse of their cause, or truth of their deductions from thence what discerning eye cannot see? That wherein they were to satis∣fie the world in by this Apology, ought to have been a clear disco∣very of their opinions and wayes, wherein they differ from us, and a vindication of the truth and equity of these above ours; but how farre they come short in the former we have heard already, and shall yet see more fully; yea how little satisfaction any intelligent Reader can find in either of these by the Apology, may be infal∣libly concluded by their own words, pag. 27. where they professe to reserve the declaration of their judgements, and what they con∣ceive to be Gods truth therein, to the due and orderly agitation of this Assembly; and pag. 30. to reserve a more exact and scholastick relation of their judgements in the points of Government about Church-government unto the more proper season and opportunity of this Assembly, &c. where we have a clear confession, that we have not a Declaration of their judgements, nor a scholastick Re∣lation thereof, which must comprehend the Arguments to confirm the same in this Apology; (which makes me wonder how they
could in the same, pag. 30. and with the same breath affirm, that thus they had nakedly, and with all simplicitie rendered a cleare and true account of their wayes and spirits hitherto) and if so, whereto serves this Apology? unlesse it be by big and plausible words to gain the affections of the unstable vulgar, before they shall come to know their wayes, which is to hold out a popular spirit. Secondly, though my conscience be my witnesse how little desi∣rous I am to accuse them of pride, or partialitie; yet that this Apo∣logie seemeth to hold out such a spirit, I presume none shall denie, who shall but impartially consider these particulars therein. First, the considence they have, pag. 3. of their looking upon the Word of God as impartially, and unprejudicially, as men made of flesh and blood are like to do in any juncture of time that may fall out; sure∣ly humilitie, and impartiall respect to themselves, would have blushed to own such an expression, and have taught them to judge better of others then themselves, especially the best, at least in some juncture of times; might there not be some juncture of time as much favouring others in this, as that did them? And in such a juncture, is it not possible, that any of the choisest of Gods people might go (though but a hairs breadth) beyond them in looking impartially on the Word of God? Secondly, consider we the dif∣ferent eye wherewith they looked upon the writings and practise of other reformed Churches, and the old Non-conformists, and those of New-England, and if they have looked no more imparti∣ally on the Word of God, they shall appear to have been but flesh and blood; here first, one argument why they judge the Discipline of other reformed Churches, not so good as their own, is, because they found that that Discipline was not so accompanied with the practise and power of Godlinesse, as they found even that in Eng∣land, how-ever accompanied with more peace; pag. 4. is not this prejudice and partialitie to respect a government, because they cannot discern those under that government to be proportionable in godlinesse to those whom (I think) they will not say lived under a better, but, we may confidently say, under a worse, to wit, Epis∣copacie? I can hardly think they can be ignorant that evill men may live under a good government, or that they can think that some defect in the execution of good Laws, whereby libertie and licentiousnesse may encrease, must needs argue a defect in the Law
it self: I beleeve our Brethren know, that the power and practise of Godlinesse are rather the fruits and effects of the free grace of God, and a powerfull and sound dispensation of the Word, then of Government, properly so called. Secondly, they but consulted with reverence with the practise and writings of other reformed Churches; but they looked upon the light of the old Non-confor∣mists as matter of advantage to them, and what they had written came more commended unto them, not onely because they were their own, but because sealed with their manifold and bitter suffer∣ings; pag. 4. So also the wayes and practises of those of New-England, they propounded as examples to themselves, (this is more than with reverence to consult with them) and that because they had testified their sinceritie by such an extraordinarie under∣taking: (as though a sincere affection and great undertaking must needs argue a right informed judgement) pag. 5. Let any judge, whether to judge more truth to be in any mans way or writing then in anothers, because the one is our Countreyman, the other not; because the one hath suffered, the other not; whether so to look on the undertakings and sufferings of some, as to with-draw their eyes from the, as great, undertakings, and as bitter, if not more bitter, sufferings, of others, be not extreame partialitie; and how this can consist with that standing as unengaged spectators they boast of; pag. 5. and whether such impartialitie, or rather partiality, as this is, in searching out truth, be not the way rather to stumble on errors then find out truth. Hereunto we may adde their partiall and tender care and warinesse of saving the credit of those of the separation, whom they will not call Brownists, but whom (say they) ye (that is, we) call Brownists; pag. 5. no wayes thus tender, or carefull of the credit of other Reformed Churches; but whereas, at least to make them equall with those of the Sepa∣ration, they should have called them such as Papists, and Lutherans call Calvinian Churches, they stick not absolutely to call them Calvinian Churches, pag. 22. Thirdly, if we will take a farther scantling of their partiality and pride in this Apologie, let us more particularly consider their aggravations of their miseries in their absence from their Countrey; as, first assuming so frequently the title of Exiles, Gods poore Exiles, pag. 22. sufferers even to Exile: pag. 31. Secondly, they tell us, these were the saddest dayes of their pilgrimage on Earth, pag. 21. where they endured many miseries
the companions of banishment, and that through the distemper of the place, they hardly came off that service with their healths, yea lives: pag. 22. First, suppose all these things were fully so, yet they conducing nothing towards that which ought to be the aym and end of this Apologie, nor they having any such occasion of this kind of boasting, as Paul had against the counter-boastings of others to the prejudice of the Gospel, where he yet did apologize for his boasting, 2 Corinth. 12.11. What can we judge lesse then that they here side more with the Pharisee than the Apostle; but I have had occasion to be somewhat acquainted with their conditions there: and I professe sincerely that (all things considered and compared) a man in such a condition might be well content to esteem any Countrey his native Countrey, such miseries, mercies, and such dayes the most comfortable dayes of their pilgrimage, and never to desire to come off that service with life; Oh how pride and par∣tiall self-love turns mercies into miseries! Fourthly, look we on the excessive hyperbolicall encomiasticks, whereby they magnifie the actions and qualities of men of their own profession, and see if there be no partiall spirit; pag. 5. they tell us, those that went to New-England undertook that voyage meerly to worship God more purely, whither to invite them there could be no other invitement; It seems they must have been very privie to the aym and by as of all these mens spirits; if they had said there was no other invitement, it had been more then they could well af∣firm, I having known some to have been invited, and others to have gone by other motives besides that, but that there could be no other, either as a sufficient motive in respect of it self, or at least as a motive to them, though perhaps in it self not sufficient to per∣swade better judgements, I presume none can beleeve, but such as resolve to point at those mens actions and ends onely with such a partiall finger, as shall put out the eye of their own common rea∣son. Again, pag. 22. they tell us they lost some friends and compa∣nions, their fellow-labourers in the Gospel, as precious men as this earth bears any; I am so far from derogating from the memorie of these mens deserved worth, that I beleeve in their life they would have abhorred such an applaudite. Fifthly, compare we the weaknesse and deficiency of the Found∣ers of Reformation in the Calvinian Churches, in attaining to the
perfection of that reformation the first day (as they call it) with their prosperous successe in their second reformation, and that the first day, and see we what spirit that will discover unto us: pag. 22. it is a ground sufficient to them to judge those Churches to have need of a farther reformation, because they come new out of Pope∣rie, and their Founders had no Apostolique infallibilitie, and so might not be perfect the first day; They on the other hand came new out of Popish and Episcopall superstition and Conformity, ha∣ving according to their own confession, pag. 3. and 4. at first never looked further then the dark part of superstitions, untill having chosen banishment, and being in that condition they were cast up∣on a farther necessitie of enquiring into and viewing the light part, the positive part of Church worship and government; whereunto if we adde, that they entred upon the practise of that worship and government as soon as they came into Holland, hereupon it must follow, they must have so farre exceeded our first Reformers as to become so perfect in their Reformation, and that the first day, as to find (according to their own words, pag. 20.) principles enough not onely fundamentall, and essentiall to the being of a Church, but superstructory also to the well being of it, and these to them clear and certain, and such as might well serve to preserve their Churches in peace, and from offence, (it is wonder there should such trouble and offence have been among them then) and such as would comfortably guide them to heaven in a safe way; and con∣sequently, either they must have had Apostolique infallibility, or must have been as blindly led on in their first practise of their wor∣ship and Government in Holland, as they were in their many yeers practise of their superstitious and corrupt government in England, and have come with such forestalled affections to enter upon their new search, as those who devour holy things, and after vows make enquirie; Prov. 20.25. it would appear the world would have come to a better and more perfectissue, if they had been the first Founders of Reformation. Sixthly, let any judge whether, for any whose wayes lie under so much suspition and censure as they acknowledge theirs to do, not having either given a full Declaration of their opinions and judge∣ments, nor scholastick reasons for the vindication of the same, (as we have seen also by their own confession they have not) to come
to such a judicatorie, as they acknowledge the Parliament to be, and require an allowance and toleration in the practise of their un∣known, and unjustified opinions and wayes, be not a touch of such a spirit as tels even a Parliament they deserve allowance in any thing, without being bound to give an account wherein, or where∣fore; if this be that respect and authoritie they give to the Civill Magistrate beyond us, we can well spare them this precedency. What concerneth a spirit of faction, singularity and schisme, first, let the world judge, whether, for these our Brethren without the knowledge and consent of that Assembly, whereof they are members, to set out an Apologie of this nature, to desire a tolera∣tion before their wayes be known, and taken into consideration by the Assembly, and that to separate from all other reformed Chur∣ches, and stand singly by themselves, savoureth not of a spirit of faction, singularity and schisme. Secondly, it is certain there is a party and faction, and a head∣strong one too of their profession in England, and therefore it is not easily to be imagined, that this can be, without some influence from them, who are known to be the chief owners, and Patrons of these opinions there: there be two particulars also, which may seem to strengthen this jealousie; first, that which they pag. 24. expresse to prove the contrary, to wit, that they found the spirits of the people of that kingdom of England that professe or pretend to the power of Godlinesse, readie to take any impressions, and to be cast into any mould that hath but the appearance of a stricter way: where ye see such sounding of spirits, with such Apologies, may it not encrease the jealousie of an intended faction? Secondly, how ever readie they are in their Considerations, Consid. 1. and 6. to dehort others from a disorderly gathering of Churches; yet one of their own profession, who ought to know it, told me they might well dehort others, when themselves had already gathered their own Chur∣ches; I have spoke with these also, who being at Brook-house in London to hear one of them preach, and he being suddenly call'd up to preach above, because of the crowd belowe, did hear many of them belowe affirm, they must hear him, and he must not preach, unlesse they heard, because they were of his flock; and himself was known to affirm, and professe he would preach no where unlesse his own people might be there; and is not this kinde of gathering
Churches somewhat factious, and a means to disturbe the peace of the Church, and give occasion of Divisions, as they confesse in their Considerations. Consid. 9. Thirdly, their expressions concerning the Church of England their opinions, government, and practise thereof are all Divisive, and destructive of the union of the Church, denying that common authoritie and government, which is the bond of that union; even as in a common-wealth, many Cities are also one body of a com∣mon-wealth, by one common Government, and common Gover∣nors. Hence they cannot endure the name of a Nationall Church, not onely as Episcopal men absurdly understand it, meaning there∣by the Bishops of a Nation, or a Convocation, but even as we right∣ly understand it to be meant of all the particular Congregations making one entyre body, which is represented in a Nationall Sy∣nod; and therefore in this Apologie they constantly speak of the Churches of England in the plurall, never of the Church of England in the singular number, as may be seen, pag. 5. and 6. whereas, as the unity of invisible grace, and that inward and invisible govern∣ment whereby Christ inwardly governs his people as King of his Church, is to us a ground and foundation whereon to build the unitie of the invisible Church; so, also by the same consequence, are we forced to draw the unitie of the visible Church from the unity of that visible profession, which all the particular Churches hold forth, necessarily requiring one visible government of Christ, by those, unto whom he hath entrusted the keyes thereof, according to that of Cyprian, De unit. Eccl. exordium ab unitate proficiscitur, ut Ec∣clesia una monstretur; the keyes not being given to the invisible, but the visible Church; hence we are not afraid to call all the visible Churches, one Church in the singular number, and that according to expresse Scripture, 1 Cor. 10.32. 1 Cor. 12.28. 1 Tim. 3.15. as be∣ing more properly the body of Christ, Col. 2.19. 1 Cor. 12.12, 13. Ephes. 4.4, 12, 16. the new and heavenly Jerusalem, the mother of us all, Gal. 4.26. (See Whittak. Cont. 3. q. 5. cap. 3. pag. 601.) and the Spouse of Christ, Revel. 21.9, 10. than any one particular Church, which D. Ames confesseth to receive the name, and nature of the whole, as a similar part, and properly to be a part in respect of the whole, as the integrall, though in respect of its composition by ag∣gregation of divers members, it is also an intire body. Ames. Med. theol. li. 1. c. 32. Sect. 4.5.
But they labour to clear themselves of such a spirit by a twofold Argument. First, pag. 23. they tell us that schisme, which they af∣firm to have been a calumny cast upon them, must either relate to a differing from the former Ecclesiasticall Government of that Church (meaning the Church of England) established, and then (say they) who is not involved in it as well as we, or to that consti∣tution and government that is yet to come, and until that be agreed on, established, and declared, and actually exist, there can be no guilt, or imputation of schisme from it. To this we answer, first, that it were no sufficient plea for them, though all others were involved in it, as well as they, if it be a schisme to differ from that government, since to have many compa∣nions in sin doth no wayes excuse us. Secondly, a naked differing from any government maketh no Schisme, but such as is accompanied with emulation, contention, and strife, whereby the peace of the Church is disturbed by divi∣ding and separating from it, drawing away others, setting up their own Congregations apart without order, preventing the Magi∣strate, or stirring up strife in it: for Schisme consists rather in affe∣ction then opinion. Hence, 1. Others differing with them from the former Government may be free of Schisme, and yet they not free. Secondly, hence they might be guilty of Schisme, even in respect of that Government which yet is to be established by their obstinate and disorderly running before Authoritie in setting up their own. Thirdly, all others differing from the former government, and yet agreeing altogether peaceably in an other are no Schismaticks, and yet they differing so with them from the former, as withall they differ from all others in their own government might be Schismaticks, suppose Schisme might consist in a differing in go∣vernment. The second Argument whereby they labour at large to clear themselves of a spirit of faction, &c. is taken from their long silence and forbearance to draw out such a spirit, being so manifoldly pro∣voked thereunto, both from the advantage they had therein from the plyable humors and dispositions of the people, pag. 24. and the writings against them, and misconstructions of their silence, pa. 25. &c. To this we answer, that this is an Argument of no consequence: for what ever spirits men are of, they may in policy, either draw
out these spirits, or in silence forbear, according as they see the one or the other may most advantage their ends. Now what ever other ends they here pretend of their silence; yet that the main end there∣of was, the better, and more easie to obtain their liberty, as them∣selves here acknowledge, this to be one of their ends, and a main one too, to wit, the hopefull expectation they have been entertain∣ed with of an happie latitude, and agreement by means of this Assembly, and the wisdom of the Parliament, pag. 26. yea, and that this was the onely end of their silence, may appear from hence. First, had they forborn, as they tell us, pag. 25. they did, because they knew and considered that it was the second blowe that makes the quarrell, and that the beginning of strife would have been as the breaking in of waters, then they might have published their opinions, without blows or scholastick reasons, as they insinuate they have done in this Apologie; and since they complain, that the cause and ground why mens affections are so edged against them, is the misapprehensions, and mistakes of them and their wayes; in all reason a naked relation of their points of difference from us, would have served to take away those mistakes, and so ra∣ther to appease, then increase strife: but the truth is, they knew that a full discovery of their wayes would have prejudiced their liberty, and therefore it was best to be filent, notwithstanding all provocations, and when they find it necessarie to write, they must be tender in touching any thing wherein they differ from us, but large enough in the enumeration of these points, wherin they agree with us, because the former might prejudice, but the latter may ad∣vance their liberty, si non castè, saltèm cautè. Secondly, all other ends pretended by them, as the avoiding occasion of strife, and their respect to a peaceable and an orderly Reformation, &c. did as much urge and presse their silence now when they wrote this Apologie, as before, and yet now their liber∣tie lieth at stake, all these cannot prevail with them to be longer silent, therefore it is evident that they were rather awakened to make this discoverie, by the hazard of their liberty, then any ex∣clamations, which they could patiently enough hear before with∣out awakeing. Thus if Independent-Government may be best judged by the spirit wherewith it is maintained, I trust the world may discern what sentence is fit to passe on it.
Next, they appeare in publike, and appeale, and that first unto the iudgement of the Parliament with a twofold confidence, the first of the iustice of this appeale manifested in a bold Quere, unto whose iudge∣ments they should first appeale, but theirs as the supreame Judicatorie of the kingdome. The second of the iustnesse of their cause, manifested in their daring, and not fearing to appeare before, and appeale unto so iust and severe a Tribunall, trusting to finde it a sacred refuge, and an Asylum for their mistaken and misjudged innocency. Brethren, you are yet but putting on your armour, and therefore boast not as they who put them off. Before whom, and unto whose iudgements should you first (say you) present your selves, but to the Parliaments? First, the end of your appearing before them, you insinuate in these words (who have hitherto lien under so darke a Cloud of manifold misapprehensions,) so the Parliament must cleare and resolve your Ecclesiasticall controver∣sies and differences, judge what is Independencie, what not, what Government is the best, what is Schisme, what not, I can yet hardly perswade my selfe you thinke the Parliament the fittest Judge in such causes. Secondly, you appeare first before and appeale unto the Parlia∣ment, and that because it is the supreame Iudicatorie: but therefore ye ought to have appeared and appealed last before, and unto it, and cannot appeale immediatly unto it, without contempt of these inferi∣our and subordinate Corporations and Judicatories you live under, Appeales being from the Inferiour to the Superiour, and from the in∣competent to the competent Judge. Thirdly, why doe they tell us of their appearing and appealing first before or unto the Parliament? doe they intend afterwards to appeare before, or appeale unto any other inferiour Judicatorie? I can con∣jecture no other reason why this word First was inserted, unlesse it were to pacifie the Assembly of Divines, in shewing themselves willing afterwards to appeare before them: but doe not themselves tell us, that they have adventured themselves upon that way of God wisely assumed by the prudence of the State, (meaning the way of the Assembly of Di∣vines) in a Consciencious regard had to the orderly and peaceable way of searching out truths, and reforming the Churches of Christ; and that as the stage whereon they would first bring forth into a pub∣like view their tenets, page 28. If they know, and are in conscience
perswaded, that the way of searching truths by the Assembly of Di∣vines is assumed by the Parliament, and that, 1. wisely, 2. as the way of God, 3. as the stage whereon first to appeare in publike view, 4. as the orderly way, 5. promised so to doe, then doe they not commit a fault against knowledge, conscience, and promise, and that foolishly, and breake and invert order, and the way of God and man in appear∣ing first in publike view before the Parliament, contrarie to the Parlia∣ments owne prudent order; specially since their appearing before the Assembly is by themselves, page 27. acknowledged to be an act of as great confidence (they calling it the most judicious and severe Theater of all other) as this in appealing to the Parliament, as the most just and severe tribunall. If their innocency in other things be no better, than this kinde of contraveening the order of Parliament, they will have but little reason to expect to finde it a sacred refuge for such inno∣cencie. This kinde of disorderly appeales troubling Parliaments with such matters, the decision of Ecclesiasticall controversies, inverting the or∣der of Legall proceedings, contemning the Order of Parliaments, and slighting and neglecting inferiour Judicatories, may shew us, how like∣ly it is that their mould will be coexistent with the peace of any forme of civill Government on earth, as they affirme, page 3. Though it hath been observed to be the impudently false language of some, that their mould and Government is the maine cause of Christ, the Parliament contends for: yet I suppose the peace of this Parliamentarie Govern∣ment hath beene somewhat disturbed by their mould, and if it be the same with that of Brownists, to wit, popular Government, as experi∣ence hath and doth hitherto demonstrate, (what ever middle way they tell us of, page 24.) then the many long and bitter Law-suits before the Governours and Government of Amsterdam flowing from the shame∣full rents and divisions, occasioned by that mould, may tell us how likely their mould is to be coexistent with the peace of any civill Go∣vernment on earth; neither hath the peace of the civill Government of Roterdam been altogether free of disturbance by their mould. I could yet give other Symptomes of the coexistencie of their mould with the peace of any other civill Government, if I would follow their example, in going about to exasperate the spirits of those in authoritie against them, as they endevour to doe against us, by telling the world, pag. 19. that they give as much, and (as they thinke) more to the Magistrates
power, then the principles of Presbyteriall government will suffer us to yeeld: or if I had not more respect to the advancement of Refor∣mation, then to thinke the whetting of the edge of authoritie (already so sharp) against who desire and urge it might be no hinderance there∣unto: if that conscientious appehension of the danger of rending and dividing the godly Protestant party in that kingdome that were desi∣rous of Reformation, and of making severall interests among them, in a time when there is an absolute necessitie of their neerest union and conjunction, and all little enough to effect that Reformation intended, and that conscientious regard to a peaceable way of reforming the Churches of Christ, whereof they make such sad profession, pag 25.26, and 28. were to be judged by such an endeavour as this, to rend the head further from the members, and the members from one another, I leave the impartiall to apprehend whether they should not rather be found to be hinderers, then furtherers, both of the Peace and Reforma∣tion intended, unlesse they apprehend their Government to be the Re∣formation intended, the Calvinian and Presbyterian Churches stand∣ing in need of that farther Reformation, wherein the first Founders of Reformation shot short, and therefore the better to advance their Re∣formation, they may conceive it fit to blow the coale, and helpe to make Presbyteriall Government the more odious in the eyes of au∣thoritie, as a deformation equall with Episcopacie on the one hand, and worse on the other hand, in derogating from authoritie what theirs gi∣veth. These men and Bishops may in the end be like to agree, and conspire againe In odium tertii: for better one Bishop then many. After an enumeration of the helps and advantages they had to finde the Truth, which we shall not need further to touch, at the end of the fifth page they give an account of their opinion of the Churches and Ministery of England: where they tell us, all the defilements thereof did never worke in them any other thoughts, much lesse opinion, but that Multitudes of the Assemblies and Parochiall Congregations there∣of were the true Churches and Bodie of Christ, and the Ministrie thereof a true Ministrie; where it is plaine, they acknowledge onely Multitutdes, of, not all the Churches of England true Churches, and the Ministrie of these Multitudes, not all, a true Ministrie. Me thinkes, Candor and ingenuitie, would here have required a plaine and free De∣claration, what sort of Congregations and Ministrie they approve, and what sort they approve not, and upon what grounds; but such plaine∣nesse
had full ill suted the end and aime of this Apologie, and therefore I must be at the paines to unfold this mysterie for them, to such as know it not. The difference then betwixt them and us in this particular consists herein. First, whereas Cartwright, Parker, and other Non-conformists agree with us, in the lawfulnesse and expediencie of confining, for orders sake, particular Churches within the bounds of severall di∣stinct Parishes, they with the Separatists thinke this confinement un∣lawfull, (though not in that degree to disanull, or annihilate the essen∣tiall being of that Church so confined) but would have a libertie left to any where ever they live, to joyne to what Church they thinke good; and though I cannot say, they take on any as members, who cannot, by reason of the distance of their habitation, be ordinarily present and joyne with them in the worship of that Church, whereof they are mem∣bers; yet being admitted members, let them remove their dwelling, and settle where they will, yea even to other Countries, yet, unlesse they have taken a formall dismission, they are accounted as members of that Church still, though it were after divers yeares residence elswhere, and have as full power in matters belonging to that Church, as those who are residents where the Church is. An instance whereof there was not long agoe at Delph in Holland, where an English Church being begun to be formed, and upon the removall of him, who was to have beene Pastour, to Roterdam, and other occasions, all the men, who had beene received members, having also removed thither, and to other places (two or three excepted) yet in the opinion of Roterdam, those remaining must be a Church still; and rather then faile, those who were removed must stand members, and ioyne with those two or three left at Delf, and must have power to call a Pastor, and take on members to the Church of Delf, they living at Roterdam and else∣where; and Mr. Forbes must be cryed out on, as the breaker of the Church, because he would not suffer such a course to go on. Secondly, whereas it is a maine foundation, whereby to iustifie that mixture, which they condemne in Parochiall Churches, and to owne even such, who being baptized and professing the Protestant religion, after being come to yeares, though in their conversation they appeare openly pro∣phane, as members of the Church, though not to be admitted to the Lords Supper: yet so as the Rulers of the Church are bound to have the oversight of them, and use the rod of Discipline against them, that
the baptized children of the members of the Church are by vertue of their Baptisme made members of the Church: for since Baptisme doth initiate them in the Church, it cannot be in the invisible, but in the vi∣sible particular constitute Church whereof their parents are members, or wherein they are baptized; for by the former, wee should, besides o∣ther absurdities, stumble upon the Popish Opus operatum, and every baptized child should ipso facto be regenerated, yet their principles will not allow this, which hold, that none are members of a Church, but such (that I may speak in Parkers words, de Polit. Eccles. lib. 3. cap. 16. sect. 1.) as being gathered by Christ into his Church by the ordinary meanes of the preaching of the Gospell, are by that preaching prepa∣red, and voluntarily enter into covenant with the Church, and are fit for participating in the Lords Supper. And hence their third and main difference from us, we may perceive in the first reason, whereby they labour to vindicate themselves from blotting the Congregations of England out of the roll of true Chur∣ches; because by the same reason (say they) the Churches of Scotland and Holland (for their mixture) must be judged no Churches also: Where they imply, not onely that their Churches are free of such a mixture, but their meaning is, that though there may be a Church, where there is this mixture of good and bad, yet in their opinion the Church consisteth onely of the good, requiring inward and true grace to the essentiall being of a member of a visible Church, still telling us with the Brownists, that a Church must consist of true Saints, alledging that place 1 John. 2.19. So then looking upon multitudes of the Pa∣rishes of England, having some true sanctified ones amongst them, them they looke on as the Church, and such Parish-Churches for true Churches onely, and that in respect of these members. This may ap∣pear more plainly in that they admit none to communicate with them but who are members of a Church, and whom they acknowledge for such by their true godlinesse, may be seen pag. 6. at the latter end, where they tell us, they did proffer to receive into communion of the Lords Supper with them, some (whom (say they) we knew to be godly) upon that relation, fellowship, and commembership they held in Eng∣land: hence a godly Minister comming to Arnhem, and desiring to communicate with them, he must first declare unto them that he was fully perswaded that there were some truly godly among those whom he had received as members of the Church, whereof he was Pastor;
because otherwise they would not have acknowledged that Church for a true Church, and so could not have admitted him being no member of a true Church, (they admitting none but such.) Hence it is that we have D. Ames, Medul. Theol. lib. 1. cap. 32. sect. 11. making true inward faith onely the internall and essentiall state of a visible member of a vi∣sible Church, as well as of a member of the Catholike, or invisible Church, and externall profession the outward and accidentall state e∣ven of a member of a visible Church: whence it must follow, that both the visible and invisible Church must have one essentiall forme, and so the visible Church shall be essentially the invisible Church, and the in∣visible Church essentially the visible Church: Also, that hee who is a member of the invisible Church must, ipso facto, be also a member of the visible Church, as being in the essentiall state thereof; whereas in truth outward profession is as essentiall and intrinsecall to the visible Church, as inward grace is to the invisible, and puts a man in the essentiall state of a member thereof, as really as inward grace doth in the essentiall state of a member of the invisible. Fourthly, such Churches where there is either an explicite or im∣plicite Covenant betwixt the members (ever supposing them to be true Saints) and the Pastor, and betwixt the members among themselves, these they hold for true Churches; but where there is no such Covenant as they must, and do imagine there is not in many parishes in England, there being in the Parish none who have thus bound themselves to one another, or to the Pastor, these Churches, or Parish Congregations they hold for no true Churches, nor the Ministry thereof a true Mini∣stry: Hence pag. 7. at the beginning, they tell us, they offered to re∣ceive some in Communion with them, whom they knew godly, by virtue of their commembership, relation, and fellowship they held in their Parish Churches in England; they (say they) professing them∣selves to be members thereof, and belonging thereunto: their meaning in these words being, that they acknowledged them members, know∣ing them godly by virtue of this their profession, this including that Covenant, whereas without this profession, and acknowledgement of themselves to be members of that Parish Church, they would not have received them into communion with them, as not acknowledging them as members of any Church. Here two things are to bee noted, as their Tenets and Practice: First, that they acknowledge no man a true Minister by virtue of his
Ordination in England; but all their acknowledgement of any true Ministery in England, is onely by virtue of an explicite or implicite Call, grounded on that explicite or implicite Covenant with him. Hence they all renounced their Ordination in England, and ordained one another in Holland: When Master Ward was chosen Pastor, and Master Bridges Teacher at Roterdam, first Master Bridges ordained Master Ward, and then immediately Master Ward again ordained Ma∣ster Bridges. Secondly, they receive none to communicate with them but such as are, and by them acknowledged to be, members of Chur∣ches: So that a man may bee to their knowledge and acknowledge∣ment in Christ, in covenant with God, and so have interest in all the promises of God, live without scandall, able to examine himselfe, and yet he shall be by them denyed the seal of that Covenant, though he be cast out of that membership, by force, necessity, and persecution. Hence when Master John Forbes was violently thrust from his Mini∣stery among the Merchant Adventurers at Delph, by Canterburies meanes, he with his whole family were denyed the Communion at Ro∣terdam: and one of the members at Roterdam taking grievously on, because one of the Merchants Adventurers (who out of conscience had renounced the Merchants Church, when Master Beaumont became Pa∣stor to it) did communicate with them, and being asked why he took such offence thereat, being he knew the man to be godly, answered in my hearing, That he had as much to doe with an Heathen and a Pub∣lican as with him, so long as he was no member of a Church: So they dote on the Communion of Churches alone, as they forget the Com∣munion of Saints. Pag. 7. They tell us of the respect wherewith they were entertained by the Reformed Churches abroad, and what mutuall respect they gave them back again. To this we answer, First, That whatever respect personall, or other∣wise, might have been shewed them at first, it might and did proceed, 1. From their being looked on as men forced to leave England, by the Bishops persecutions. 2. From the benefit the members of their Chur∣ches residency brought to the places where they lived. 3. From the ignorance of their wayes; and therefore let us see what respect they had when their wayes were knowne: Those of them who were at Ro∣terdam, know what opposition Master Parke had from the Dutch-Church at Delph, the Ministers thereof drawing their main plea from the
confusions and schismes of Roterdam, obiecting them continually, fea∣ring the wayes of their Church to be erected at Delph might be confor∣mable to theirs; and warning the Magistrates of Delph openly out of the Pulpit, to take heed what English Preacher they allowed there, lest one Church might quickly multiply in two or three, and those of seve∣rall wayes, as they affirmed it to be in Roterdam. Neither are they (as I beleeve) ignorant how much the Dutch Preachers of Roterdam so∣licited the Magistrates, that they might be commanded to bring their differences to the Classes or Presbyterie, whereby such members, as finding themselves aggrieved, complained to the Dutch Preachers or Classes, might find a way of redresse. Secondly, I know no other entertainment any of their Churches had there, but what other Sectaries had, save onely one of their two Churches at Roterdam, where their Preachers had maintenance allow∣ed them, and that was by reason that that Church was formerly under Presbyteriall Government, and conformable to the Dutch-Churches, and had onely begun to decline towards their wayes, a little before their comming to it, in Master Peters his time, who yet notwithstand∣ing professeth himselfe at this houre to be a Presbyteriall man, for all his having been in New England, since his being Pastor of that Church: Master Sympsons Church maintained their owne Officers, and preach∣ed in a private house, which they then fitted to be a publike allowed Church since, (if this word, Church, in this sense be not offensive to them). Thirdly, What may concerne the mutuall respect they gave unto, and correspondency they also held with the Reformed Churches: We confesse they acknowledged them for true Churches, yet it is not un∣knowne with what disdaine and censure, they, and their Presbyteriall way have been commonly spoken of at Roterdam; neither can they shew us such a correspondency and fraternity between them and these Churches, as I am (and I beleeve truly) informed Master Sympsons Church (whether by him, or after his time by Master Symons I have not enquired) entred in, with those of the Separation at Amsterdam, by a mutuall covenant and agreement to owne each other. I beleeve it to be by vertue of that correspondency and covenant, that some of their members, not Officers of the Church, nor Ecclesiasticall persons, doe publikely preach in Master Cans Pulpit at Amsterdam. In their Relation of the waies and practices of their Churches, pag. 8.
they are so wise as to borrow some of that humane prudence which they so much condemne in matters divine, pag. 10. for scarce touching any thing, wherein their wayes and practices differ from ours, they onely mention such particulars wherein we agree; pag. 23. they grievously complaine that the odious name of Brownisme, together with all their opinions, as they have stated and maintained them, are cast upon them; a man would think therefore that it should concern those men, in the account they give of their wayes and practices, to shew the world fully how much they differ from Brownists, if they would have that imputa∣tion taken off: and yet, in the enumeration of their wayes and practi∣ces, they mention nothing but what is the way and practice of the Brownists in conformity with us, as fully as theirs: They tell us in the first place, that publike worship was the same with that of the Reformed Churches; but they doe not tell us whether their publike Worshippers be the same or not, there being here a wide difference betweene them and us; for whereas we appropriate publike preaching and praying to the Ministers alone, by virtue of their Office, (they being onely ap∣pointed by God to be his mouth to the people, and theirs to him) their common and ordinary practice alloweth this liberty to any man of the Congregation, in whom they apprehend ability thereunto, so that hee is a publike Preacher to day, who to morrow is no more, nor hath more charge in the Church then the meanest member; hath not Master Law∣rence, a Gentleman and no Preacher, yet preached all this while at Arnhem, while his brethren were in England: but this had too neere affinity with Brownisme, and therefore it was prudence to conceal it: neither was some of their preaching and prayers altogether the same with the preaching and prayers of the Reformed Churches, as I was informed from Master Sympsons often hearers, and very good friends; who told me, his Prayers and Sermons contained little or no matter of confession of sinne, or threatning of judgement, or what concerned the Law, or repentance; but of exalting the grace of God in Christ alrea∣dy wrought, and of thanksgiving, as being bound to frame his Ser∣mons, and direct his speech to the benefit of none but those of his owne Church, on whom he looked as already converted; these therefore hee was onely to confirme and awaken to thankfulnesse, and not to aime at the conversion of any, it being the ordinary opinion among them, that this is not the worke of a Pastor. Thirdly, in the matter of singing of Psalmes, which they reckon one part of their publike worship, they
differ not onely from us, but are also at variance among themselves; some thinking it unlawfull for any to sing but hee who preacheth, and this hath been the late practice at Arnhem; others thinking it unlawfull for women to sing in the Congregation; hence some women at Roter∣dam doe not sing with the rest of the Congregation: I heare also they think it unfit for any at all to sing in such times of the Churches trouble as this. Fourthly, they differ from other Reformed Churches in their publike prayers; for whoever preach or pray otherwise among them, yet none must pronounce the blessing but the Pastor; neither doe they esteem it lawfull to use the Lords Prayer in publike. Fifthly, in the Ad∣ministration of the Sacraments they differ from them also; for they will baptize none but the children of their owne members. Secondly, They tell us their Officers are the same with those allow∣ed by the Reformed Churches; but so are the Brownists Officers also: Why did they not tell us, whether their way of calling and ordaining their Officers was the same or not? here we should have seen that an Officer cannot be called among them, unlesse he be first a member of their owne Church, as among the Brownists: So that if they be to call some one who hath been, or is a Pastor elsewhere, he is not capable of a call to be their Pastor; but they must onely call him to be a member with them, and he must take his hazzard of being called Pastor, after he hath left his former charge, and joyned in membership with them; and I assure you, this may prove a hazzard sometimes amongst them: So here we should have seen that not onely the power and practice of Calling, but also of Ordination, is wholly and solely in the hands of all the Congregation indifferently amongst them: neither were all their Officers the same with those of the Reformed; for I heare of no ruling Elders that ever Master Sympson had in his Church, but that he thought that Office unlawfull; which sutes better with their principles then the contrary: for if the Keyes of Government and Discipline be given to all the faithfull, what Keyes of this nature should these Elders have apart? These Elders are (say they) with them, not Lay-men, but Ec∣clesiasticall persons, separated to that service: But, Brethren, have all Churches ability to maintaine them? is every Church furnished with men of such abilities, as you require these Ecclesiasticall Elders to be? your Church at Roterdam hath long wanted Elders, and that, by their owne confession, for these reasons: and if the troubles end in England, they may be like to want them still; and therefore, Brethren, doe you
thinke Christ hath confined his Church within the compasse of these straits? Thirdly, the matter of Government (say they) and Censures was the same, which all acknowledge, viz. Admonition, and Excommu∣nication; but was, or is the form the same also? doe they not plead as hard for the peoples right, and power in Government, and Excommu∣nication, equall with that of the Rulers, without subjection either to Consistoriall, or Presbyteriall authority, as ever Master Canne did for Sions Prerogative Royall? and yet these mens way of Government must lie in a middle way, between Brownisticall and Presbyteriall Go∣vernment, pag. 24. I doubt when this middle way shall be discovered, it shall be found medium abnegationis in respect of Presbyteriall, and medium participationis in respect of Brownisticall Government. By these particulars it may in measure appeare how just cause they have to complaine, that all the opinions of the Brownists are cast upon them, and what warning they took by the Land-marks, and Ship-wracks of the Separation, of these rocks and shelves they runne upon, as they pro∣fesse, pag. 5. to have taken: and it is worth the noting, that pag. 23. they doe not complaine, that they are simply made to owne all the o∣pinions of Brownisme, but that they are made to owne them as they are stated and maintained by them; doe but state them otherwayes, which may be done without any great materiall difference, and the occasion of that complaint is taken away. Fourthly, they tell us they use Excommunication onely upon obstinacy and impenitency, and that for sinnes against the parties knowne light, and the light of nature, &c. A man would think these our Brethren were very sparing of their cen∣sures, yet they have been observed, by all who have known their waies, to censure some persons for some such causes, as no well Reformed Church would censure any; but to passe that, together with the dan∣ger of their restraint of Excommunication to such sinnes as they doe restraine it to, onely, me thinks, what they here affirm is not very su∣table to that their practice, whereof I am informed by those who ought to know it, to wit, they having some discourse in their publike meeting concerning the introduction of that which they call Prophecy, in their Church at Roterdam, and of dissolving the Church, that they might cast one in their owne mould; whereupon six or seven members standing up, and telling them, they would complain to the Magistrates that they were Brownists, and were a going to change the Church
into a Brownist-Church, it was immediately voted about, whether these members should not instantly be excommunicated? and was car∣ried affirmatively, and should accordingly have been executed, had not Master Bridges his prudence prevented it. I think it may be much questioned, whether these men here sinned against their known light, or the light of nature? however, sure the time was very short to con∣vince them of impenitency and obstinacy. Next they come to their Principles, the first whereof is to follow the patterne and example of the Churches erected by the Apostles, and not to move beyond the direction of the Scripture, not daring to eeke out what was defective in their light with humane prudence. brethren, Scripture is a full and perfect rule; yet you confesse here, that there is such a blemish in our eyes, as we cannot come to a cleare knowledge of the directions and examples therein, especially to finde out rules for all cases, though they be to be found; why then, when any case may occurre, a rule concerning which we cannot finde in Scripture, yet, if we may find a rule for it in prudence, which Scripture doth not crosse, nor it Scripture, must we there suspend all practice, when the case ur∣geth something to be done, and prudence furnisheth reasonable and equitable grounds and wayes to proceed in? When we finde generall rules in Scripture, as of Decency and Order, must not prudence help us to apply them fitly to particulars? When we urge them often, from their owne principle, with the Apostles directions and examples in Go∣vernment and Ordination, it being never left to the people in Scrip∣ture, &c. they are ready to tell us, the Apostles were extraordinary persons, and therefore not imitable: must not prudence here umpire the businesse, and shew us what actions are imitable, or not imitable in the Apostles? We have seen they can sometimes help themselves with prudence, yea such humane prudence as we shall never owne: When he which succeeded Master Bridges was asked why he would, against his heart, and with griefe, at the peoples desire, urge that Member of whom we have made former mention to leave the Church, he answered he tooke the prudentiall way. Whether was it the rule of Scripture, or humane prudence, that put them at Roterdam on that resolution of dissolving the Church, both first and last, that they might be free of such members as were not of their mould? Wee have a generall di∣rection in Scripture, that the members of a Church shall entertaine Church-communion together; some kinde of prudence taught some
women at Roterdam for a long time to apply this rule to a particular practice of communion together every weeke, in ioynt fasting and prayer, till better prudence hath of late taught them to leave it. God give all of their minde and way prudence to apply Scripture fitlier, and more properly then they usually doe in these controversies with us, and then our Brethren doe here that particular Scripture of the old and new garment, to that purpose for which they apply it. The rules of di∣vine and humane prudence may be the same, and equally appliable to humane and divine matters, as the Morall law, and the law of Nature are. We hope both Scripture and prudence, and if neither of these, at least experience shall in the end teach our Brethren, that popular Go∣vernment is not the way to preserve Churches in peace, and from of∣fence. Their second Principle was, not to make their present iudgement and practice a binding law unto themselves for the future. I think no man makes his practice a law for the future; but why durst they not trust their present iudgement? they are iealous of themselves (say they) because they had too great instance of their frailty, in the for∣mer way of their conformity. Here we see first that they were iealous and doubtfull, whether that Worship and Government they practised was right or not, fearing their iudgements might be misinformed in this, as in their former conformity: where is then the truth of what they affirm immediately before? that they found in the word Princi∣ples enough, not onely fundamentall and essentiall to the being of a Church, but superstructory also for the wel-being of it, and those to them cleare and certaine. Secondly, they commend this as a Principle to be carried about with us, not to make our present iudgements a bind∣ing law to us for the future: I grant this is a good Principle where men are so uncertaine and iealous as they were, and hope this Principle may be a meanes of their union with us in the end, which is the thing our soules breathe after; but to such as have attained to a certainty of the truth and equity of their wayes, they are bound to make that certainty a binding law for their future practice: neither did I thinke that our Brethren would have us live in a continuall wavering and doubting, and not, according to the rule, bee perswaded in our minds, Rom. 13.15. and not condemne our selves in what wee allow, and sinne in all wee doe, not doing it of faith, ibid. 22, 23.
Their third principle was, to choose still to practise safely, and so as they had reason to judge that all sorts, or the most of all the Churches did acknowledge warrantable, although they make additaments; here their rule is, 1. to practise safely; 2. they measure this safe practise, by all or the most Churches acknowledgement of that practise to be war∣rantable, as may appeare by their first instance, the taking in of mem∣bers, wherein (say they) they choose the better part, and to be sure, (that is, to practise safely) received in none, but such as all the Churches in the world would by the balance of the Sanctuary acknowledge faithfull. First, this principle crosseth the first, where they justly made the Scripture the onely measure of safe walking. Wee are much to honour the unanimous consent and practise of Churches, and wish our brethren would not so easily take up singular practises of their own, which they so unanimously condemne, or reject those which they ap∣prove: but wee require them not to make their warrant the rule of safe practise to them. Secondly, in this their first instance, where they say, they received none, but such as all the Churches judged faithfull, if they would hold to their principle in stead of (judged faithfull) they should have said, (judged warrantable to receive;) for all the Churches may acknowledge some faithfull, whom they will not judge warrant∣able to receive. Thirdly, it is neither the safest way, nor doe all, or the most Churches judge it warrantable to receive none, but whom all the Churches in the world shall acknowledge faithfull; what if any one, or some Churches such as theirs, or the Brownists, may not (as they doe not) acknowledge some, yea many faithfull, whom other, yea, I dare say, all other Reformed Churches will acknowledge such, doe they therefore thinke that all the other Churches will iudge it warrantable, that these shall not be received, because they acknowledge them not faithfull? Fourthly, if they thinke they walke safely in practising so, as all sorts, or the most Churches iudge warrantable, then, why doe they not receive such others, besides them they doe receive, whom, I beleeve, they know the most part of other Reformed Churches ac∣knowledge warrantable to receive? Why is not the warrant of the most of other Churches as powerfull with them in these things, which they call their additaments, as in other things? must not their answer be, because all the Churches acknowledge what they doe lawfull and good, but they cannot iudge, that which other Churches doe beyond
them, lawfull, and so the English of their practising, so as all, or most Churches shall acknowledge warrantable, must be, that they will embrace and follow the warrant of other Churches, though the most, or all, so farre as they shall have their owne warrant, and so the safetie of their practise shall be measured by their owne, not the warrant of any or all other Churches; but to come to particulars, do not all, or the most Churches acknowledge it warrantable, and safe to receive such whose tender hearts may cast them in such doubting, (notwithstanding their exemplary conversation) as they dare not professe themselves to be converted, and so proffer them∣selves to the church in their desire of enjoying ordinances of Christ, as having interest therein in Christ, as they require to be done by every one, whom they receive: one whom they will acknowledge as holy and savourie a Christian as any in their Church of Roter∣dam told me, that Mr. Bridges having urged them to become a mem∣ber of that Church, the partie answered, they could not, as not daring to make such a profession, not having that assurance of their conversation or interest in Christ. Secondly, the most Churches thinke it the safest way to hazzard to erre rather in the excesse, then in the defect of charitie; yea that charity is to umpire the businesse, whether to judge the partie faithfull, or worthy to be received, or not, in respect of some acts of some sin, or sins in him, on the one hand, and other wayes and carriages, as signes of sinceritie on the other hand; but their practise is not futable to this practise and judge∣ment of most Churches: for they receive none, but whom all the Churches in the world shall acknowledge, that is, evidently see with∣out scruple to be faithfull. Thirdly, all or most Churches think it safe and warrantable, that those who are to be received, be tryed by the Gevernours of the Church, and that apart from the Congregation and not to allow a licentious liberty to all, and every member o the Church, to goe first and enquire in their wayes and conversa∣tions, and to examine them by private conference, and then caus them to make a publike confession of their faith, in the hearing of all the Church; whereby many that have not the least, but even much of Christ, are many times, out of bashfulnesse and other re∣spects, kept out; but their practice herein is quite contrary to this iudgement of most Reformed Churches. Fourthly, they here tell
us, they took measure of no mans holinesse by his opinion, whether concurring with them, or adverse unto them, that is, be of what opi∣nion he will, if they can finde holinesse in him, which they measure not, nor iudge by his opinion, they received him: but I am sure all the other well Reformed Churches in the world, will be so farre from acknowledging this practise warrantable, as they contrarily will iudge this a very Heterodox position, as admit∣ting not onely Brownists, Arminians, and Lutherans, and Ana∣baptists to be members of their Churches, but not excluding men of any opinion whatsoever, and iudging holinesse may consist with any the grossest opinion; and so Arrians, and So∣cinians may be holy men; but charitie forceth mee to beleeve, that though out Brethren have here over-reached themselves in their expressions, yet their meaning was onely to shew they ad∣mitted Protestants of all opinions, for them, or against them and their holinesse; they did not measure by their opinion, as we may collect from that immediate following expression, where they tell us, they were sure no Protestant could but approve (as touching the members of it) of Churches made up of such; but my Brethren, you are more consident of this also, than you have reason: for I beleeve, no Protestant, but them∣selves, will either approve of Brownists Churches, or allow any Reformed Church to receive Brownists, shewing, and pro∣fessing themselves to be Brownists, or Separatists as members, a profession of the Orthodox Faith and Truth of the Gospell, and a Communion with, and acknowledgement of the true Churches of GOD, without Schisme from them, being requi∣site in such members as the Reformed Churches will approve: Neither can wee see how they can receive any Protestant, though hee differ in opinion from them: for how can they re∣ceive any of the opinion of Presbyteriall Government, since such must not onely refuse to take a share of their Keyes in his owne hands, as not iudging the Keyes to belong to him; but also to submit himselfe to their Government, as being in his opinion unlawfull, will they receive such a one? I trow not.
Passing their second instance, I come to the third, wherein the maine controversie between them and us doth consist: And here they misse-shape and mistake the Question, that we scarce know where or how to fasten on them. For first, they being (accor∣ding to their Principle) to shew, that what is their practice in the matter of Government and Discipline, is acknowledged war∣rantable by all, or the most of the Reformed Churches; to shew this, they first tell us, that however the practice of the Reformed Churches be, in greater matters to governe each particular Con∣gregation by a combined Presbyterie of the Elders of severall Congregations, united in one for Government; yet so as in their judgements (meaning of the Reformed Churches) they al∣low, especially in some eases, a particular Cougregation a com∣pleat and intire power of jurisdiction to be exercised by the El∣ders thereof within it selfe; (thus far they.) Here they them∣selves give us three Restrictions of that power, which by the judgment of the Reformed Churches is given to particular Con∣gregations within themselves; and so (according to their Prin∣ciple) their practise of that power ought to be bounded by those Restrictions, that so it may be judged warrantable by the Refor∣med Churches. Now let us examine whether it be so or not. The first Restriction must be, that particular Congregations must have this entire and compleat power within themselves onely in smaller matters; for in greater matters (say they) the practise of the Reformed Churches is, to governe them by a Presbyterie. But doe they not assume this power in all, even the greatest matters, as in their sole calling and ordination of Officers, and Excommunication, &c? Nay, doe not these words (intire and compleat) exclude all limitations? Doe not these words, pag. 14. where they professe to assume a full, intire, and compleat power within themselves untill (say they) we should be challenged to erre grossely, shew us, that they do not so much as acknowledge them∣selves bound to require the help of other Churches, even in their consultative way, without any authoritie, and that in the grea∣test matters, untill they be challenged to erre grossely; which can∣not be till the errour be committed, and consequently till they have encreased their power in that wherein their errour is. The second Restriction, whereby they acknowledge the Reformed
Churches have limited particular Congregations in their power, is, in that they allow them this power within themselves (say they) in some cases onely; and this we doe not denie: for in case a particular Church be solely remote from other Churches that it cannot enjoy the benefit of a Presbyterie, we deny it not an exercise of power within it selfe; for Necessity hath no Law; and this case is extraordinarie, and so cannot be regulated by ordi∣narie Lawes: but doe they not assume this full and compleat power in all, and not in some cases onely, and so walk without the circuit of their Principle? The third Restriction is, that the Reformed Churches allow all this power in particular Congrega∣tions (say they) to be exercised onely by the Elders thereof. Here, if by the exercise of that power by the Elders, they meane, that the execution onely of that power is proper to the Elders, and that the power it selfe belongeth to all the members of the Congregation; then first, they wrong the Reformed Churches, in making them to give onely the exercise of that power, and not the power it selfe, to the Elders: Though some particular men may derive the power from the bodie of the Church to the Offi∣cers, yet I beleeve they shall finde no Reformed Churches but will affirme, that the Officers have the power of jurisdiction it selfe, as well as the exercise thereof; the Reformed Churches leave this opinion to them, with Papists, Prelates, and Brownists: and so they want the warrant of the Reformed Churches in this also. Secondly, suppose the Reformed Churches did allow onely the exercise of power to the Elders alone, doe they so also? No surely, if giving suffrage and definitive sentence, calling, exami∣nation, and ordination, and deposition of Officers, excommunica∣tion, publike preaching, and praying, be exercises of power, which any member of the Congregation may, and doth as well exercise amongst them as the Elders. When that businesse of the depositi∣on of their Pastor was in debate between them of Rotterdam and those of Arnhem as they had all had a hand in this deposition, so in that meeting did not the richer sort of the Church agree to make up the losse, which the poorer sort complained they did sustain by being kept from their work, that they might all stay, to the end the busines might be agitated by all their suffrages, and by their common power; (here by the way, me-thinks such inconve∣niences
as these, commonly attending their Government, might shew them, it must be rather a yoak then a prerogative:) be∣sides, will they affirme that all the while either the one or the other Church of Rotterdam wanted Elders, they could have no exercise of Government; there is no Elder there at this present, nor hath been since Mr Burroughs went away, yet they will con∣fesse they assume both a power and practice of Government, (by Elder I here meane onely a Ruling-Elder, for I know they will not say the Pastor can governe alone:) and if Mr Sympson, or others among them, will have no Ruling-Elders, as not allowing of them, who then shall have the exercise of Government? Thus we see by these particulars in these two instances, how justly they may or doe hold forth that true and just Apologie unto the world, that in the matters of greatest moment and controversie, they still choose to practise safety, and so as they had reason to judge that all sorts or the most of all the Churches did acknow∣ledge warrantable, although they make (say they) additaments thereunto. Next, whereas they should have shewed us where the most Reformed Churches give such power as they assume to them∣selves, and to particular Congregations, in stead of these Chur∣ches they give us three Non-conformists; and as though their very names would strike all dead, they usher them in with a (yea;) yea and (say they) our owne Mr Cartwright, holy Baines, and other old Non-conformists, place the power of Excommu∣nication (this is more then the practice or exercise of Excommuni∣cation) in the Eldership of each particular Church, with the con∣sent of the Church, untill they doe miscarry, and then indeed they subject them to Presbyteries, and Provinciall Assemblies, as the proper refuge for Appeals, and compounding differences among Churches; which combination of Churches (say they) others of them (meaning Parker) call Ecclesiae ortae, but particu∣lar Congregations Ecclesiae primae, as wherein firstly the power and priviledge of a Church is to be exercised; thus far they. Here they would perswade us, that these Authors place a full power of Discipline in the particular Congregation, untill they miscarry, a Presbyterie or Synod not having power to meddle with them,
but in the case of grosse miscarrying. For Baines, I have him not by me, but I remember when I read him I found him fully for Presbyteriall Government ; but sure I am the other two are made to speak what they never meant: for Cartwright in his first Reply to Whitgift pag. 187. telleth us, that not onely if the El∣ders shall determine any thing contrary to the Word of God, (which is our brethrens case of miscarrying here) but also in harder and difficulter causes (which I hope may be before the particular Church may miscarry in them, and not onely for re∣medie of the vices and incommodities which the Churches be in, but also are in danger to be in, (and consequently in danger to miscarry in) things were carried to the Synods, Provinciall, Na∣tionall, or Generall, where he mentioneth this practice as a thing he so far allowed, as he telleth us we ought to have our recourse to such remedies, and that for that end these meetings ought to be as often as conveniently may be. As for Parker, he indeed calleth particular Congregations Ecclesias primas, and Synods Ecclesias ortas, but not as they affirme; because the power and priviledge of a Church is firstly to be exercised in these Congre∣gations: for we shall presently see, that he thinkes that in many cases it should not be firstly exercised by them, (or rather indeed he calleth them so, not in respect of, or relation to, either the power, or the exercise of that power first or last, but in respect of the originall of their being and nature, the primae Ecclesiae being before the ortae, and these having their rise from a combination of the primae, as we may see in his definition of both, de Polit. Eccles. l. 3. cap. 13. at the very beginning of that Chapter) and so he cannot call them so for their (therefore;) that is, because the power must be in the particular Congregations, till they mis∣carry, and then onely the parties aggreeved might appeale to Presbyteries and Synods: for he will have things referred to a Synod, first, in all common matters, allowing a particular Con∣gregation power onely in her owne proper matters, that is not a case of miscarrying. Secondly, if proper matters cannot be de∣cided in the particular Congregation, he referres them to the Presbyterie, here is yet no case of miscarrying. Thirdly, then commeth in their case, that is in case of ill administration.
And fourthly, he giveth liberty of appeale from a particular Con∣gregation to a Presbytery or Synod, even when they have well administred, and so not miscarried; and that, as he proveth, by the University of Paris, and Whitaker; because Appeales are ju∣ris divini & naturalis, which I desire our brethren to take notice of: See Parker de Polit. Eccles. l. 3. cap. 20. Sect. 2. And in the same third Book cap. 23. sect. 3. we shall see him allow the fonne of Geneva, where the lesser and more insufficient Congregations may not excommunicate, nor exercise Discipline, without ha∣ving recourse to the rest of the Churches, as a practice founded on the communion of Churches, and having its rise from the prudence of the Spirit; yea, and he thinks this a thing not un∣worthy the most perfect Churches to practise; quod ego Ecclesiis vel perfectissimis haud indignum reor. Thus they have neither any reformed Church, nor these Authors they so much rely on, to help them, in their independent power within particular Con∣gregations, even til they be challenged to erre grossely. But page 14. they will not have this power called an Independent power, abhorring that proud and insolent title: Why? because the very sound thereof (say they) conveighs to all mens apprehensions the challenge of an exemption of all Churches from all subjecti∣on and dependencie; or rather, a Trumpet of defiance, against whatsoever power, spirituall or civill. Brethren ye are very angry at this title, and therefore wrong the innocent Word, the sound whereof neither imports nor conveighs any apprehension of defi∣ance; for one man may be said not to depend on another, and yet not to defie him, for he may be more then his match; neither doth it conveigh to mens apprehensions an exemption from all subjection and dependency, and that on whatever power, either spirituall or civill, but simply an exemption from dependance on power, which no rationall man can presently apprehend to be from all kinds of power: but you may, and that justly, be called Independents, if there be any sort of power you depend not on, nor are subject to; and I am sure you exempt your selves from a de∣pendence on the power of Presbyteries and Synods: But you will tell us, as you do pag. 14. that you claim not an independent pow∣er to be subject or give an account to none others; but onely a full and complete power within your selves untill you should be chal∣lenged
to erre grossely; such as (mark it) Corporations enjoy, who have the power and priviledge to passe sentence for life and death within themselves, and yet are accountable to the State they live in. If hereby you meane, that as these civill Corpo∣rations are subject to the civill State in their civill causes, so your Ecclesiasticall Congregations, and for decision of Ecclesiasticall controversies, are subject, and that only, to the civill Magistrate, then as the comparison is too unsuitable, so I hope you will grant that we may call you Independents, as you exempt your selves from any Ecclesiasticall subjection to any Ecclesiasticall authority of Presbyteries and Synods: If by that comparison you will illu¦strate and declare the dependance you are willing to have on, and thereby to give an account to and be censurable by other Chur∣ches, as these Corporations are by the State, as you expresse page 21. then if you will but stick to your owne fit comparison, the controversie shall be ended betwixt us: For then, first, as this Corporation, being an intire body within it selfe, is also a part of the greater body of the State composed of that, and all the other Corporations in the State: so a particular Congregation, though it be an intire body, yet is it also a part and member of the grea∣ter body of a nationall Church, composed of that and all the other particular Churches in the Nation. Secondly, as this Corpora∣tion is accountable to the State, as to a superiour Judicatory, ha∣ving authority over it, though it be collaterall to every one of the other Corporations, whereof the State is composed: so a particular Congregation, though collaterall to the severall other Congregations, yet must be subject to them combined in one Na∣tionall Church, so as they must have an authoritative power over it. Thirdly, as the superiour Judicatory (as a Parliament) may by its power take any cause immediately before them; so the combined Churches may take a cause out of the hands of a parti∣cular Congregation. Fourthly, as there are some cases as of Treason; and some parties, as Noble-men, which are not to be judged by any particular Corporation, under which the parties live, but by a superiour Judicatorie, and their Peeres; so also there may be some cases and persons in a particular congregation, which may not be judged but by a combination of Churches. Suppose the King were a member of some of these our brethrens
congregations, he having any of them to be Pastor to the Church of his family, would they think their sole authority sufficient to judge him especially it being very like they are of Ambrose his minde, that Emperours and Kings may be excommunicated? were their sole authority sufficient for such a sentence against such an one, in whom, and wherein the whole State and all the Churches must be so much interested, as the foundations of both might be shaken thereby: Ambrose was wiser, who would not undertake to excommunicate Theodosius without a Synod. I entreat our brethren seriously to consider, whether common rea∣son doth not shew the same equity and necessity to be of the same proportionall authority of Synods over particular congrega∣tions, as there is of that authority in the State over particular cor∣porations in these particulars, in the acknowledgment whereof if they would join with us, we should not quarrell with them con∣cerning that state of the Question, which they frame page 14. al∣ledging, we affirme that it should be the institution of Christ, or his Apostles that the combination of the Elders of many Chur∣ches should be the first intire and complete seat of Church-power over each congregation so combined; or that they could chal∣lenge and assume that authority over these Churches, they feed and teach not ordinarily, by virtue of those forementioned Apostoli∣call precepts: for though it be a question agitated among Divines, especially Papists and Episcopall men, the one to uphold the power of the Pope and the Romish Church; the other, to up∣hold their Cathedrals: yet we shall willingly yeeld them, that the combined Presbytery is not the first intire, full, and complete seat of Church power over each congregation so combined; nei∣ther doe any of these derive power to other but instrumentally, both having their power immediately from Christ, who when he gave power to the one gave it to the other also, as they cannot but have seen sufficiently cleared by their owne Ball in his Triall of the grounds of Separation, cap. 12. That which we affirme, is, that as by Christs and his Apostles Institution, every particular congregation is to govern it selfe Aristocratically by its Gover∣nours and Rulers; so these congregations, by the same instituti∣on, and the Law of nature, and common reason, ought to be so combined as to governe themselves authoritatively by their
Rulers and Elders, deputed, and so farther and immediately au∣thorized to that end by their severall congregations; neither do we ascribe to them, or doe they assume that authority over those Churches, they seed and teach not ordinarily, by virtue of those Apostolicall precepts, which our brethren mention page 14. ei∣ther onely, directly, or principally, as they here suppose; as we shall presently see in the examination thereof. After we have first examined out brethrens first argument, urged against the power of Presbyteriall combinations, which they urge page 13. where they tell us, the first Churches planted by the Apostles consisted of no more, then might make up one particular congre∣gation in one City at first; and so for the Churches in the Acts, by the testimony of Non-conformists: therefore particular con∣gregations (which must be their inference) had their intire and complete being and power within themselves, before, and with∣out cerivation of that power from Synods, or before they could be combined in Presbyteries. This last inference they there in∣timate. To this we answer, first, that if this argument were reduced in a forme, we should finde foure termini in it: for whereas the premises onely mention congregations of Cities, the conclu∣sion is generall of all other congregations also, and so they con∣clude also à particulari ad universale. Secondly, either they af∣sinne the Apostles gave those first Churches their complete power, without those three restrictions formerly mentioned, or with these restrictions: if the former, then besides the truth of what wee formerly affirmed of their not tying themselves to these restrictions in their practise, wee see also they mentioned these restrictions onely to make the World beleeve their practice is conformable to that of the reformed Churches; whereas here they tell us, that of the Reformed Churches to be contrarie to Apostolicall institution: If the latter, that is, if the Apostles gave particular Congregations that power so limited, then it must fol∣low, that the Apostles must have allowed of some other seat of power, whereby that limited power might be more enlarged, and accordingly practised: for if the power of particular congre∣gations be, and that by Apostolicall institution, onely in smaller matters, and some cases, must not the Apostles allow another seat
of power in greater matters, and all cases? Thirdly, this argu∣ment runneth upon these false suppositions; first, that as soon as particular Churches have a being, they must ipso facto have all power: secondly that no particular Church can by our opini∣on have a being before a combination of Churches: thirdly, that this combination also by our opinion must bee the first seat of Church power, deriving it to particular Congregations. This later we have disclaymed already, and the second we are so farre from owning that contrarily we cannot but know from our own principles of Presbyteriall government, that there must have bin particular congregations formed, and invested with power, as the matter wherof the Presbytery is to be compounded, & from whose power their Delegates must bee authorized, before there could be Presbyteries, thus compounded of and authorized by them (who knoweth not that simples must be before their com∣pounds as there must be particular corporations before there be a Parliament; but that it doth hence follow, either that these Churches thus formed by the Apostles, are not to combine in Presbyteries and Synods afterwards; or that therefore no parti∣cular congregations may be formed by the power of Presbyte∣ries and Synods is as absurd, as that particular corporations in a Nation are not to joine in a common State, because there was no such State when the first Corporations were erected; or as, that States or Parliaments may not erect or forme new Corporations in a Common-wealth or Kingdome, but they must forme them∣selves by their owne power, because there was no common State, or Parliament composed of divers Corporations, at the forming and erecting the first Corporations, but Corporations were before them: Let States, Parliaments, and civill Magi∣strates here observe, what power the principles of Independency alloweth them above and beyond that, which the principles of Presbyteriall Government will or can allow them. Fourthly, I answer, that though there were no Presbyteries then to give be∣ing to, and to forme those first Congregations yet there was that power which is equivalent to the power of Presbyteries, to wit, Apostolicall power, and wee see these Congregations did not forme or plant themselves, nor were they formed and planted by any one Preacher alone, as theirs are, but by the Apostles: this
Apostolicall example is to us morall, grounded upon this perpe∣tuall equity, that Sectaries of any profession might not have li∣berty at their pleasure to gather themselves into Churches, and this example our brethren knew to have been constantly followed and imitated in the Church after the Apostles times, which by the corruption of times gave accidentally occasion afterwards to the usurped power of Cathedrall Churches, which from hence were called Mother Churches; we give this power to combined Churches, as being both most equitable, that what power in such a case an Apostle used, should not be exercised by any one person or Church, but by many; and also is most sutable to that equality which our brethren and we both justly require in the Church of God. Their second argument is this, pag. 15. whatever power com∣bined Churches assume over particular congregations, must be as∣sumed by vertue of those Apostolicall precepts, which they relate pag 14. but that cannot be, for (say they) we judged that all those precepts, Obey your Elders, and them that are over you, were (to be sure and all grant it) meant of the Pastors and Teachers ordi∣narily feeding and teaching their people, and other Elders that were set over them in each particular congregation respectively, and to be as certainly the intendment of the holy Ghost, as in these like commands, Wives obey your owne husbands, servants your own Governours, to be meant of their severall families respectively; where they insinuate, that by vertue of these precepts, Pastors and Elders are only to rule their owne particular congregations, and these only obey their owne Rulers thus set over them, even as husbands are only to rule their owne wives, and masters their owne servants, and wives and servants to obey none but their owne husbands and masters. To this argument we answer: First, that it is false, that all the authority which combined Churches assume or may assume, over particular congregations must only be by vertue of these Aposto∣licall precepts. We confesse, if there were no other grounds for Presbyteriall Government then these precepts, that these alone would not enforce it; they might therefore have done well to have proved this, that there can be no other grounds for that authority, but from these precepts; whereas contrarily wee
know the Apostles had authority over particular congregations, and by vertue of that authority enjoyned them these precepts; and therefore their authority over them could not be derived from these precepts: and if there may be other grounds for A∣postolicall authority, why not also for Presbyteriall? Secondly, if all authority of Pastors or Rulers over particular congregations must be drawn from these precepts, then either there must be no authority (especially since Apostolicall power is at an end) over Pastors, Teachers, and Elders themselves, or then wee must have it from these precepts: and so first, the meaning of Obey your Elders, &c. should be, Elders obey your selves. Secondly, whereas they subject the Officers and Elders unto the people the precepts must be inverted thus, Elders and Governours obey them that are under you, and your owne ser∣vants, husbands obey your owne wives. I hope these absurdities may let our brethren see, that as there is a necessity of Presby∣teriall Government, so that it is not firstly or only to be derived from these precepts, but farre more pertinently from that pre∣cept Mat. 18. Tell the Church; on which words, their owne Parker de Polit. Eccl. lib. 3. cap. 20. pag. 318. hath this glosse. For (saith he) since Christ will have every one judged by his owne Church, Mat. 18. or if the judgement of his own Church displease him, yet ever (mark it) by the Church, that is, (saith he) by a Synod of many Churches. Secondly, from that precept Acts 15.28.29. and 16.4. the same Authour telling us de Polit. Eccl. lib. 3. cap. 23. pag. 346. that here the Church of God hath ever held Synods to be instituted to last for ever in the Church, and from that precept 1 Cor. 14.29, 32. where we have a constant rule drawn from the law of nature and common equi∣ty, that a Prophet be judged by Prophets, a Preacher by Prea∣chers, and not by the people, as their practice is. Having then these with many more cleare patents for Presbyteriall Govern∣ment, we answer in the second place, that this supposed, even these Apostolicall precepts, Obey your Elders, and them that are over you, though they be immediately understood of these Go∣vernours of a particular congregation, who ordinarily feed and teach them, yet they include that equity which will furnish an argument and precept both, of obeying all other Governours
over us. Besides these (supposing I say) that these other Go∣vernours have first another ground of their authority over us, even as Honour thy father and thy mother, could not be extended to other Superiours besides fathers and mothers if there were no other grounds nor precepts for other superiorities, but that precept; but supposing other Superiours have their authority warranted from other grounds then this precept, enjoyned us by the unanimous consent of Divines, to honour them aswell as father and mother, to whom it is immediately directed. Thirdly, this supposition of theirs is false also, that these pre∣cepts Obey your Elders, and them that are over you are exclusive, as being so to be understood, as enjoyning them to obey them only and none besides them; even as a command enjoyning the members of a particular Corporation to obey those who are over them in that Corporation, doth not exclude obedience, or command disobedience in them to the King or Parliament: (I know not what they may give to civill Magistrates more then we, but sure I am, civill Magistrates had need to look to the con∣sequence of such arguments) neither can the like precepts of wives obedience to their own husbands, &c. enforce this; for though that precept enjoyn them to obey them, and them alone as their husbands; yet not simply to obey them alone, so as to obey none but them: (but because it is usuall with those of their would to stick too close to that comparison, and think the rela∣tion of a Pastor to his people to be of the like nature with that be∣tween man and wife; I wish all such to be wary in this and con∣sider, first, that we are but Stewards in Christs family, Christ himself being the only husband to the Church; and so secondly, one congregation may have divers Pastors, as a family may have divers stewards whereas a wife can have but one husband:) for suppose the relation were the same between the Pastor and peo∣ple, as betweene man and wife; yet many, yea all acts which a husband doth to his wise as his wife (that one excepted whereby they become one body) he may doe to others also, though not as to his wise: a husband doth ordinarily teach his wife, enter∣taine and seed her, provide for her and all as his own wife, yet he may doe all this to others also, though not as to his wife. A Go∣vernour of a particular corporation governs them of that corpo∣ration
ordinarily as his ordinary charge; may he not therefore be delegate by that corporation to be a member of Parliament, and so governe the whole Kingdom. If what ever a man doth, as a Pastor to his owne flock, may not be done by him to any besides them; then how come our brethren to celebrate the Commu∣nion to members of other Churches, to baptize their children in the congregations of England, to preach and pray to other con∣gregations upon occasion: if preach, pray, administer Sacraments to their own congregations be not so to be understood, as that this is to be done to them alone, then why must, governe your owne congregations, be so understood as to govern none else, espe∣cially since I think they will not affirme communion in govern∣ment to be equivalent to adultery, more then communion in the Sacraments, though indeed there be no act in a Pastor to any others besides his own people equivalent to adultery, their relation between him and his people not being such as is between man and wife. Here we would know of our brethren, what they conceive to be the ground of all visible communion, between the visible Churches of Christ, is it not their visible union? Let them then examine this visible union, and see whether it be not such (as it must be) a ground of communion in Government, as well as in Sacraments, and other Ordinances. It hath been found and esteemed such in the judgement of all Divines and Churches unanimously hitherto, and the sole foundation of Synods of all sorts, which is the cause there hath been so little written of this subject; because it was held as a principle not to be controverted, which is an argument for our brethren, rather to be convinced by, then to make use of for their advantage. Fourthly, if these precepts must be understood exclusively, and so as Governours of Churches are to governe none but their own particular congregations, or the people to obey none but their own Rulers, then all Church-government shall be confined within the bounds of a particular congregation; and so first ex∣clude the Apostles themselves, 1. from having any power to go∣verne other congregations whom they seed not, nor teach not ordinarily; nay the Apostle must here exclude himselfe, and en∣joyne this precept without any power so to doe: for if the meaning of, Obey your owne Rulers, be, obey them alone, then
the Apostle had as much as in direct termes said. Obey not me nor any Apostle. 2. Then the Apostles should also have beene excluded from being subject to government, since I think our brethren will not say they were to be governed, or censured as members of a particular congregation, by the particular Rulers of any one such congregation. In this discourse we are not so to be understood, as though we taught, that any Pastor of one congregation might as freely, and by the same pastorall power, goe and governe another con∣gregation as he may preach and administer the Sacraments there∣in being desired; and therefore it is to be noted that when ever we speak of any power the Pastor of one congregation hath to governe another, and the obligation that the members thereof have to obey him, it is meant of his joynt power as a member of a Presbytery or Synod; we grant then, that the same power which may warrant a man to preach and administer the Sacra∣ments in another congregation, doth not warrant him to govern there also, but to that end, he must have some authority super∣added to his former power, and that in relation to them whom he is thus to governe; and so may in some sense be called their Governour, though not as he is their Pastor, ordinarily to feed and teach them: for men do not governe in Synods by vertue of their ordinary pastorall authority, but only in so far as that autho∣rity may be and is by Divines called Fundamentum remotum of that government; but by vertue of that power and authority where∣with they are invested by commission and delegation from their respective congregations, and by vertue of this delegation it is, that the respective congregations are obliged to obey the decrees of the Synod, as Parker observeth de Polit. Eccl. l. 3. c. 26. p. 370. whence it appeareth, that as no particular Congregation is obli∣ged to obey a Synod but such as hath its Delegates there; so al∣so, that our Synodall and Presbyteriall Government differs toto coelo from Hierarchicall Government, where one Cathedrall Church, or rather one Bishop, domineers it over the rest; whereas ours is nothing else but a fraternall and collaterall combi∣nation of the power of many Churches in their Delegates, repre∣senting their severall Congregations, whereby they mutually governe themselves, as the Elders of a particular Congregation
doe that Congregation. Hence the same Parker de Polit. Eccl. lib. 3. cap. 23. pag. 350. telleth us, that the subjection of a particu∣lar Congregation to a Presbyterie, is no Hierarchicall subjecti∣on; nay, no subjection at all, unlesse (saith he) one may be said to be subject to himself; neither (saith he) is there any subjecti∣on where all are equall. That all this may be the clearer, and that stumbling-block whereon many stumble (wondring how a man may performe a Pastorall act, as administer the Sacrament to another Congrega∣tion whereof he is no Pastor) may be removed, we are to consi∣der, 1. that in a Pastor there is, first, his order or degree, as a Phy∣sician hath his degree of a Doctor. Secondly, there is his relati∣on to his People in the discharge of that office. 2. To doe a Pastorall act may be understood two wayes; first, so as to doe any thing by virtue of that order or degree, as a Physician admi∣nisters Physick by virtue of that authoritie he hath as a Gradu∣ate Doctor: and in this respect a Pastor may administer Sa∣craments to others then his owne People, yea though for the time he have no Flock, being ordained a Preacher, and not sus∣pended or deposed. Secondly, to doe a Pastorall act may be un∣derstood so, as to doe any thing by virtue of that Relation, wherein we are ingaged to any People as a Pastor: and in this respect a Pastor is onely to preach, administer Sacraments and exercise discipline, to his owne People. Thirdly, there may be a twofold jurisdiction in a Pastor; the first, Pastorall properly so called, by ordination: the second delegatorie by deputation: by the former, a Pastor is onely to governe his owne People; the second may be extended to others also even as a Governour of a Corporation is to governe that Corporation onely, by virtue of that his relation thereunto; but as he may be delegated by that corporation to be a member of the Parliament, he hath a juris∣diction which is to be extended through the whole Kingdom. After they thought they had by these objections sufficiently shaken the foundation of our Presbyteriall Government, and fenced their own; in the next place, in stead of many objecti∣ons, they might have mentioned against their opinion and pra∣ctise, and having as much reason to mention them as this, they pick out one sa a matter of common prejudice against them,
and that is, that in their way, there is no sufficient, nor allow∣ed remedy for miscarriages, wrongfull sentences, Heresie, schism, &c. Here, first, I observe our Bretherns policie, in telling the world, this Apologie only containeth a naked Relation of their wayes, without a Scholasticall declaration thereof, as if there were no arguments to bee found in it; that the world may believe they have yet reserved their strong weapons; whereas wee here see both an offensive and a defensive warre, and are assaulted with such shafts as they have hitherto, for ought I have ever observed, esteemed the best in their quiver; and here we see they choose this objection, as the maine and common mat∣ter of prejudice against them to answer too. But to the particu∣lar, this (say they) is a matter of common prejudice against them; We Answer, they might have found it as common if not a more common prejudice against them, that there is in their way, no sufficient meanes to prevent all these evils; if they may at their pleasure form Churches, call and ordaine Pastors of what stamp they think fit, Turpius ejicitur quam non admittitur hospes, they know the old rule, principiis obsta sero medicinae paratur cum convaluere morbi, preventions then are better then remedies: but how shall these be used in their way? other Churches may be and are many times ignorant of their actions, till they be done, as wee saw in that act of deposing their Pastor; how then can these be prevented? they have good reason not to frame any objection of this nature against themselves, for it can hardly be answered by these who challenge an exemption from all kinde, even of consultative Dependance on any, till they be challenged to erre grosly, which sheweth us that that which they affirme to the contrary pag 16. That matters of concernment, are not to bee attempted without consulting with sister Churches may passe pro forma, the former being their maine tenet as themselves have stated the Controversie between them and us, this being but at most a publike profession of those others, who were offen∣ded at that act; but suppose this were a solemn statute among them; yet we see they did attempt a matter of that concern∣ment without consulting with others; whereas if they had been under our Government, this could not have been. It is hard for
a mixt Multitude to keep within bounds, when they have the reines of Government in their own hands, and have no bound to restraine them, but that inward bond of conscience; we have sound by experience among them, that even when conscience urgeth a thing should bee done, yet corruption will keep it back, unlesse an outward authority put in withall: For conscience hath been long urging the taking away of that scandall occasioned at Rotterdam by that schism, where divers members left the one Church, and joyned to the other, so disorderly, wherein even the Rulers of the one Church had a deep share; yet as that could not then be prevented; so there had been many meetings, Ser∣mons, and all meanes used to presse the conscience of taking it off by a re-union of the Churches and yet the way to doe it could never be found till the Magistrates Authority and com∣mand sound it. Secondly, small matters may bee as great an occasion of schisme, &c. in such a Government as theirs, as great matters, as many experiences have shewed among those of the Separation. But how do they answer this Objection? their answer is large, and confirmed by a large Relation of an instance: the summe of the remedy for these evills amounts to this, that if a Church of∣fend any other Church or Churches, the Church or Churches offended shall agitate the matter with the Church offending, and if they will not give satisfaction, then the offended shall pro∣nounce a sentence of Non-communion against them, as unworthy of the Name of a Christian Church. Wee answer, first, this remedy may prove worse then the disease, when the Church or Churches offended shall be both party offended, and judge, to call the offending to an account, and pronounce a sentence against them: doth not reason and expe∣rience teach, that when there is none to goe between the Accuser and the Accused, the debate ends rather in more strife then in a making up the former breach? Secondly, this is a way of very dangerous consequence: for from these grounds, our brethern lay down for this practise, one Church being offended at never so many, may, nay is but bound to call them to an account, and not receiving satisfaction must pronounce a sentence of Non-com∣munion against them. Thus one Independent Church may scrape
all the Reformed Presbyteriall Churches in England, out of the role of the true Churches of Christ. Brethren this is no good plea for liberty. Thirdly, how will our Brethren make it good that the Law of the Communion of Churches, and for the vindi∣cation of the glory of Christ, the Church offending is bound to submit themselves to the Churches offended, as they affirme, pag. 17. doth either Gods Law, or mans Law binde any to submit themselves to their party and Accusers? doth not Christs Law teach us the cleane contrary, that if the offended brother cannot gaine the offending, he shall not presently judge him himselfe, but first take two or three with him, and yet if he will not heare them; he nor they are to passe sentence, nor is he to submit himselfe to them, but the Church must Authori∣ratively decide it: And therefore fourthly, What reason can our Brethren shew in equity, why controversie between Church and Church may not, yea, must not be decided by Authority, as well as those between man and man. Is there not as great, yea more necessity of an Authoritative decision in the one as in the other and therefore is not this to tax Christ, either of negligence or want of wisedome and power to have provided, as well for whole Churches, as members of Churches. Fifthly, what ground have they to pronounce a sentence of Non-communion against whole Churches upon every offence, wherein they receive no satisfaction, this savoureth somewhat more of Prelaticall usur∣pation of one Collaterall Church over another, then Presby∣teriall Government doth. Sixthly, since our Brethren call this sentence no Excommunication, by what rule can they break off totall Communion from Churches not Excommunicated. Their rule they give us pag, 17. to be the Law of not partaking with other mens sinnes: But here first, doth not their admonition sufficiently free them of this participation without withdraw∣ing from them. Secondly, these are the men who in their search of truth, were forewarned by the fatall miscarriages, and ship∣wracks of the separation, to avoid these rocks and shelves they runne upon, and who made such an inquiry into their principles, the causes of their devisions, pag. 5. and will by no meanes owne that odious name of Brownisme. Now I pray you is not this miserable principle (that to communicate with wicked men or
such as uphold any sinfull course, even in the good and Lawfull ordinances of God, doth polute us, and make us partakers of their sinnes, the maine rock whereon they have made shipwrack in their Separation from the Church of England. This remedy they confirme to be effectuall by an instance of an Assembly of two Churches in a case of offence here, first, pag. 20. they call this a solemn Assembly, the solemnity whereof left a deep impression in their hearts of Christs dreadfull pre∣sence. Whereas this Assembly consisted only of the Church offending, and foure Members of the Church offended? what an impression then might the solemnity of such grave Assemblies of other Churches leave in their hearts, if they were as well acquainted with their number, gravity, learning, and pious pro∣ceedings. Secondly, in that same page, they tell us they were desired to yeeld a full and publick hearing before all the Churches of their Nation, or any other whomsoever, which (say they) they sub∣mitted unto: and pag. 21. they tell us it was openly before all Commers of all sorts, whereas it was in a private upper cham∣ber before none but the parties interressed for ought I can learn, and where no others could in civility come. But what concerneth the efficacy of this instance. I answer, first, that the remedy was not so full as the disease; for though the Pastor was restored yet the rent and division, which was oc∣casioned by that businesse was not taken away, but those mem∣bers who disorderly left the Church, and joyned to another, continued so untill of late that the two Churches united. Secondly, suppose the plaister had been as large as the sore; yet all the plea they can draw from thence, for all the flourish they make of it, is as though a man would urge that all Authorita∣tive Judicatories were both needlesse and unlawfull because one difference between two parties was taken away by themselves. Another pretty argument they have to prove the efficacie of this their way, and that comparatively; wee have it pag. 19. from a supposition, which they make: suppose (say they) that other principle of an Authoritative power, in combining Churches to Excommunicate other Churches to be the ordinance of God, yet (say they) unlesse it doe take upon mens consciences, the of∣fending
Churches will slight it, as much as that other way. On the other side (say they) let this way of ours, bee but as strongly entertained as that which is the way of Christ, &c. And it will awe mens conciences as much, &c. To which I shall give no other answer, but that this is a way of arguing, which is sure to carry the cause, for if they may suppose that though our way be the command of Christ, yet will not take with mens consciences, and that theirs is the way of Christ, and will bee entertained as such, they may suppose also the con∣clusion will be on their side. Finding nothing more much material to take notice of in this Apologie, I shall close with a note on our Brethrens closure in a desire of liberty; this liberty they call pag. 25. that peaceable practise of their consciences, where they put the word (consci∣ences) in an other character, as intimating that word to bee causall, and so by this rule there must be liberty of consciences, here all may see what that reformation is, which they professe to have such respect unto; but (say they) they are but lesser dif∣ferences, wherein they differ from us. Brethren government we know is in the Church a wall to preserve her in Doctrine, and therefore a small breach there even by small differences, may make way for greater, even in Doctrine; Wherefore I beseech you and all others seriously to consider what you affirm pag. 24. that you found the spirits of those in England, that professe or pretend to the power of Godlinesse (they finding themselves to be so much at iberty and new come out of bondage) ready to take any impressions and to be cast into any mould, that hath but the appearance of a stricter way; and then judge your selves what must needs bee the issue, if such a people were left to that farther liberty, which you plead for by consent of Authority, and whether this were not a more certaine way to lose Religion in a crowd of Sects, by breaking down this Wall of Govern∣ment, then to advance that Reormation in England which all sincere and pious hearts breathe after, which I beseech God in his own time to establish. FINIS.
