I100 778.k.15.[12] R231667 99888714 203943
Imperial Chocolate Made by a GERMAN Lately come into ENGLAND. I IMperial Chocolate excels all others; because it is made of Sugar. the spiritual part, and not the gross body of Spice; and Cacao Nut first well cleansed from the Husk and Shells, then cured, and the earthy Substance taken from it, so that it doth not nauseate the Stomach, nor cause loathing or any Inclination to vomit but is a great Cordial, restores lost Strength, gives Appetite, wonderfully chearing the Spirits. II. This highly purified Chocolate hath a sufficient quantity of the spiritual part of Spices only, to correct the coldness of the Nut, which neither obstructs nor inflames the Blood. III. The choicestripe Cacoa Nut makes the brownest Chocolate, and the fattest; this Chocolate being cut or pared, shews within full of very small-milk-white specks every where of a like consistence. IV. Lay a little piece on your Tongue, it will presently dissolve, not leaving grit, sliminess, or any trash behind it, as other Choco∣late doth that is made of uncured Cocoa-Nut, and adulterated with Indian Corn, Acorns, Almonds, Seeds, Husks and Shells of Cocoa-Nuts, &c. V. To preserve it good a long time from its great Enemy moisture, keep it close in Tin-Boxes, or in old thick Oaken Chests in a dry place.
VI. Take half a pint of River water, when it boils, throw in an Ounce of Chocolate cut small, with as much beaten Loaf-Sugar, and immediately take it from the fire, (or in a moment it will burn and e∣vaporate;) cover and mill it a little, then after half a quarter of an hour froth it very well with the mill, and drink it as hot as you can. Some love it with a new-lai'd Egg broken into it just before they be∣gin to froth it up, which is not amiss; divers of those that put either Milk or Wine, have found the addition very prejudicial to their Healths. VII. All good Chocolate once drest, must be drunk before ever it grow cold; if set before the fire to keep warm, it will not only burn, but lose its fine Spirits, and flavour and be quite spoil'd, remain flat and dead, very hurtful to the Stomach. VIII. Chocolate scraped very fine with as much fine loaf-Sugar and cold Spring-water very well mill'd, is a curious Cordial Julip in hot wea∣ther; but left it should over-cool the Stomach, it will be convenient to use the double spiced; for the Cacao Nut of it self is very cooling. IX. Pots to dress Chocolate for present drinking, with Mills exactly sized of a new form, as also convenient Boxes of several sizes, are to be had for the preserving Chocolate good a long time, at cheap rates. Imperial Chocolate marked with the Imperial Arms, is sold at.   lib. s. d. Plain Chocolate the pound 00 10 0 Double spice Chocolate the pound 00 11 0 Plain enriched Chocolate the pound 00 12 0 Double enriched the pound 00 14 0 Double spiced & double enriched the pound 00 15 0 Eating Chocolate the pound 00 12 0 Eating enriched the pound 00 14 0
