L1382e 99828237 207571
A LETTER From a Gentleman in EXETER To his Friend in LONDON. SIR, I Have received yours, and had long e're this given you an Account of the state of Affairs with us, had there not been apparent hazard both to you and my self by doing it, both Par∣ties examining Letters; and if any thing I had written had been mis-interpreted, it might have been very prejudicial to one or other of us. I shall now give you the Truest and most Exact Information that can possible be given of so great an undertaking; which take as follows. The Prince of Orange arrived at Torbay on Monday Novemb. 5. about twelve of the Clock; by three in the Afternoon we had the News thereof brought to this City, by several Expresses to the Earl of B. they landed all their Horse first, and after that their Foot, the Army being all on shore by three of the Clock in the After∣noon, all the Baggage, Provision and Am∣munition being sent about from Topsham, whence they were brought by Water to this City: abundance there were that landed with the Prince at Torbay for pre∣sent Service, in cafe there were need. The Wednesday, being the seventh Instant, one. Captain Hicks came to Town, Son to Mr. Hicks late of Portsmouth; and as soon as he came, the people in very great num∣bers flockd to him to List themselves in the Service of the Prince of Orange; which the Mayor hearing of, sent for him, and demanded of him whether he had a Com∣mission for what he did, but he would produce none, nor give any account of the said Design, whereupon he was com∣mitted to Prison: The concourse of the people was so great about the Guildhast, that they would not suffer him to be car∣ried away; so he remained there till the next day, in the custody of two Constables, and was very nobly provided for by the Mayor. On Thursday the Lord Mordant, with three or four Troops of Horse came to Town, and Dr. Burnet with him; when they came to the Gate of this City, it was shut against them, upon which the Lord Mordant commanded the Porter to open the Gate on pain of death, which was presently set open, and being open, required him on the same penalty not to shut it again. As soon as they were en∣tred, the Lord Mordant went immediate∣ly to the Hall, and set Captain Hicks at Liberty, and enquired of his usage, who gave the Lord Mordant a very large ac∣count of the Mayors respect and civility to him; upon which there was a Guiney given to them that waited on him. That Afternoon the Lord Mordant and Dr. Burnet waited on the Mayor to know if he would meet the Prince of Orange at the Gate, and govern the City under him, which he excused, and told them he was under the obligation of an Oath to His Majesty, and therefore desired he would lay no command on him that should be prejudicial to his Conscience; and after some debate of the matter 'twas deter∣mined. Thursday they continued coming into Town; on Friday the Prince came with his Guard; they were marching into, and some thro' the City to places adjacent about three hours without ceasing, and more or less they came in still until night. Men better Horst I never saw in all my life Saturday, most part of the day, Sabbath-day, Monday and Tuesday the main Body of the Army came, and most of them, on∣ly some few Regiments of Foot marched to Tiverton, Collumpton, Honiton, &c. and
to the Neighbouring Parishes, and the Foot to Clift Heath where they Encampt and pitched their Tents. The Bishop fled, and is come for London, and we Hear is made Archbishop of York. The Dean likewise withdrew, whose House the Prince took for his Lodgings. The Lord's Day Dr. Burnet Preacht at the Cathedral on the last v. of Psalm 107. Whoso is wise, and will observe these things; even they shall understand the loving kindness of the Lord. Wherein he observes the wonderful Pro∣vidence of God towards them in the whole Conduct of Affairs in this under∣taking, and how they intended to have Landed the 4th of November if it had been possible, it being the Prince's Birth-day, and the Day of his Marriage to the Prin∣cess, but they could not possibly make to the Land, and so could not get Ashore till the 5th, that our Deliverance might be begun on the same Day it formerly was designed for Ruin and Destruction. Monday all the Cannons that were in the Town were summoned to appear in the Quire. And likewise the Singing men; where after they had Sung Te Deum, Dr. Burnet read the Prince's Declaration, and after the Declaration, a short Prayer for the success of the Prince, and so depart∣ed, there was not one of the Cannons ap∣peared, and when the Declaration was reading, the Singing men went away, they being commanded in their Service to for∣bear praying for the Prince of Wales. Monday Captain Burrington, who lives by Creditton came to the Prince, and of∣fered him his Service, who was very kind∣ly received by him; after that every day the Gentry from all parts of Devon and Somerset, &c. flocked to him in great num∣bers, it would take up too much time to name them, few absenting themselves, and those that did there is great notice ta∣ken of them. They have entred into an Association to stand and fall with the Prince. Several Lords came to him while here, as the Lord Colchester, Shrewsbury, — Cornbury. There were seven Scotch Lords, one Irish, and eighteen En∣glish Lords that came over with him. It is incredible to tell you what they have brought with them, unless you saw it, there being 200 of their Ships come into the River of Topsham. Plymouth Fort is surrendred to the Prince by the Earl of Bath, and the Popish Officers that were there, with Father Turner are seized and secured, and the Popish Souldiers dis∣charg'd, and coming hither and owning themselves such, are committed by Mr. Seymour, who is made our Governor, and one Major Gibbons Deputy Governor. Here are several Thousand Souldiers that have Listed themselves, and many Thou∣sands more would have done the same, but the Marischal de Schomberg told the Prince there was no need of them; so they were dismist again. They have a vast Treasure with them, I am certainly inform'd of Fifty Waggon load of Money. They have Landed about 120 Field-pieces, several of which remain here, and the others are gone with the Prince. They have also brought three Ships laden with Fire-works, and as many Arms as will serve 60000 Men, besides Aparrel. They have one Company that are all six Foot and a half high. The last News we had was that the Prince was at the E. of Bri∣stol's near Sherbourn, where we are inform'd that Prince George, the Duke of Grafton, the Lord Churchill, and Collonel Trelawny met him, and that the Prince saluted them in the words of David to the men of Judah and Benjamin in the 1 Chron. 12.17. And David went out to meet them, and an∣swered and said unto them: If ye be come peaceably unto me to help me, mine heart shall be knit unto you: but if ye be come to betray me to mine enemies, seeing there is no wrong in mine hands: the God of our Fathers look thereon, and rebuke it. And they replyed in the words of Amasai in the 18th verse. Then the Spirit came upon Amasai, who was chief of the Captains, and he said, Thine are we,David, and on thy side, thou Son of Jesse: Peace, peace be unto thee, and peace be to thy helpers, for thy God helpeth thee. Then Da∣vid received them, and made them Captains of the Band. The Prince at his going from hence gave the Mayor this Chara∣cter, That he was worthy to be trusted, for being faithful to his Trust. There are very many other things of lesser mo∣ment, which I have not time to treat, neither shall I trouble you with them. POSTSCRIPT. WE have had two Alarms this week of the French being landed, one at Salcomb in the South, and the other at Portlock in the North Seas, but both prove stories; the Country appeared with Sithes, Hay-knives, Corn-pikes, Muskets, and other Instruments that could be got wherewith to encounter them: I believe there were at least an hundred thousand in all places in the Country in Arms. At Dunsford the people ran away to Arms, and left the Corps when they were going to Burial. Printed in the Year 1688 With Allowance.
