L1729 [ocm]18782258 205287
A LETTER TO THE Bishop of Munster; Containing a PANEGYRICK OF HIS Heroick Atchievments, IN HEROICK VERSE. LIV. Orat. Injurias & non redditas, causam hujusce esse belli audisse videor. London, Printed in the Year 1666.
portrait of bishop TRES-ILLVSTRE ET TRES-EXCELLENT PRINCE, CHRISTOPHLE-BERNARD DE GALEN, EVESQVE DE MVNSTER, PRINCE DV SAINCT EMPIRE. Le Prince est apresent en guerre auec les Estats Generau des Grou vnies des Pays-bas à l'occasion des places d'Etdeler et de Berkel
A LETTER TO THE Bishop of Munster, &c. REnowned Prince, Master of Might and Myter, With sword of Flesh, and sword of Spirit fighter; Ride on and prosper: (Sir) where you are Head That Army's by a Prince and Prophet led, Moses and Aaron: In a word you are Both Mars and Mercury, Councel and Warre.
Your Camp consists of Christian Souldiers right, And bravely do under Christs Banner fight. Who ever sees you in the Field must grant That now the Church is truly militant. The French and Dutch, pure saints are in this fray, That fight against the Church, are they not pray? But they have found on both sides to their loss The Bishops Crosier, France and Holland's cross. Whilest your bright two edg'd Sword, if I may say Like that of Paradice? turns every way. You sight with here both Babilon and Mecha, Strugling with divers Nations like Rebecka. Holland has all, that's no Religion; France Has complemented Christ to a Romance. You're come to do, what Mortal hardly can, Christen a Jew, and a Samaritan.
The frantick French, for so it seem'd you good, To cure their Frenzie you baptiz'd in blood. And for the Dutch, on a hard task you fall, Yet cut their Sluces, you baptize 'em all. The Faith's Defender promis'd to appear, Great Brittan's Monarch to be God-father: God-father did I say? unworthy Elves, He comes to make 'em answer for themselves. He did last year baptize their Admir'ltie As God did the Aegiptians i'th' Red Sea. But you (great Sir) you have 'em every way, As Prince you beat, as Priest you make 'em pray; And glad they can get quarter on their knees, 'Tis doubly fought, Paul's Sword and Peter's Keyes; As for their Plumb-broth, though I tast it not, I'm sure the Bishop set his foot i'th' pot.
All Winter they in troubled waters fisht, A merry Christmas many times was wisht. But as to you Sir Heaven has strow'd your way With dust of Diamonds, and Pearls that lay Thick as the piles of grass; where could ye go But through th' Almighty's treasury of Snow? The Christal waves conspir'd for want of Wood To make themselves your Bridge o're their own flood. The half starv'd Dutch a much worse bargain got, A winter was too cold, service too hot. Yet to this comfort oft they did resort, The season though severe, the dayes were short: And yet to such of them as dar'd to fight They were so long they thought 'twould ne're be night. Some sought for long, what others found too soon, Such as were got in a dead sleep by noon:
They never heard the pamper'd Pransers stamp, Nor wak'd they at the thunder of the Camp. Endimion did but wink, to these, whose eyes Morpheus had lockt up with his leaden keyes. 'Tis not a Cucko storm, no, no, ware head Cryes out the trembling boor, when it hails lead: Flemmings look to't, here comes a new Spring tide, Y' had need besluice your selves on Flanders side. Here comes the Bishop with a deluge round ye, Not to confirm ye, hang ye, but confound ye. Has laid his hands upon your heads, I trow You never thought to have been Bishopt so. You must expect so long as he abides In Flanders, he will soundly lace your sides. Flanders will serve him for Lawn-sleeves he sayes, But he'l have Holland for his Surplices.
He'l make ye write again, if at these rates He humble ye, The poor distressed States. Address your suite then to the Myter'd man, And lowly fall 'fore your Diocesan. The mouths of Cannons speak his loud Oration, Believe it Boors, 'tis a sharp Visitation. Who e're till now our eyes the witness be Had thought t'have seen Holland a Bishops See? FINIS.
